RESILIENCE AND RECOVERY:
FINDINGS FROM THE
KAUAI LONGITUDINAL STUDY

F

or many years mental health
professionals tended to focus
almost exclusively on the negative
effects of biological and psychosocial risk factors by reconstructing
the life histories of individuals with
persistent behavior disorders or serious emotional problems. This retrospective approach created the impression that a poor developmental
outcome is inevitable if a child is
exposed to trauma, parental mental
illness, alcoholism, or chronic family discord, since it examined only
the lives of the “casualties,” not the
lives of the successful “survivors.”
During the last two decades of
the 20th century, our perspective
has begun to change. Longitudinal
studies that have followed individuals from infancy to adulthood
have consistently shown that even
among children exposed to multiple
stressors, only a minority develop
serious emotional disturbances or
persistent behavior problems. Their
findings challenge us to consider

the phenomenon of resilience, a dynamic process that leads to positive
adaptation, even with a context of
adversity (Luthar, 2003).
Only about a dozen longitudinal studies have examined this phenomenon over extended periods of
time—from infancy to adulthood.
The Kauai Longitudinal Study is
the only study to date that has examined development from birth to
midlife. The study explores the impact of a variety of biological and
psychosocial risk factors, stressful
life events, and protective factors
on a multi-racial cohort of 698 children born in 1955 on the Hawaiian
island of Kauai, the westernmost
county in the U.S.A.
In the Kauai study, a team of
mental health workers, pediatricians, public health nurses, and
social workers monitored the development of all children born on the
island at ages 1, 2, 10, 18, 32, and 40
years. We chose these ages because
they represent stages in the life cycle

that are critical for the development
of trust, autonomy, industry, identity, intimacy, and generativity (Werner & Smith, 1982; 1992; 2001).
Some 30% of the survivors
(n=210) in our study population
were born and raised in poverty, had
experienced pre- or perinatal complications; lived in families troubled
by chronic discord, divorce, or parental psychopathology; and were
reared by mothers with less than 8
grades of education. Two-thirds of
the children who had experienced
four or more of such risk factors
by age two developed learning or
behavior problems by age 10 or had
delinquency records and/or mental
health problems by age 18.
However, one out of three of
these children grew into competent,
confident and caring adults. They
did not develop any behavior or
learning problems during childhood
or adolescence. They succeeded in
school, managed home and social
life well, and set realistic education-

Regional Research Institute for Human Services, Portland State University. This article and others can be found at www.rtc.pdx.edu
For reprints or permission to reproduce articles at no charge, please contact the publications coordinator at 503.725.4175;
fax 503.725.4180 or email rtcpubs@pdx.edu
FOCAL POiNT Research, Policy, and Practice in Children’s Mental Health Summer 2005, Vol. 19 No. 1, pages 11-14

al and vocational goals and expectations for themselves. By the time
they reached age 40, not one of
these individuals was unemployed,
none had been in trouble with the
law, and none had to rely on social
services. Their divorce rates, mortality rates and rates of chronic health
problems were significantly lower
at midlife than those of their same
sex peers. Their educational and
vocational accomplishment were
equal to or even exceeded those
of children who had grown up in
more economically secure and stable home environments. Their very
existence challenges the myth that
a child who is a member of a socalled “high-risk” group is fated to
become one of life’s losers.
Resilience in the Formative
Years

Three clusters of protective factors differentiated the resilient boys
and girls who had successfully overcome the odds from their high-risk
peers who developed serious coping
problems in childhood or adolescence.
1. Protective factors within
the individual. Even in infancy,
resilient children displayed temperamental characteristics that elicited positive responses from their
caregivers. At age one, their mothers tended to characterize them as
active, affectionate, cuddly, goodnatured, and easy to deal with; at
age two, independent observers
described the resilient toddlers as
agreeable, cheerful, friendly, responsive, and sociable. They were
more advanced in their language
and motor development, and in
self-help skills than their peers who
later developed problems.
By age 10, the children who
succeeded against the odds had
higher scores on tests of practical
problem-solving skills and were
better readers than those who developed behavior or learning problems. They also had a special talent
that gave them a sense of pride, and
they willingly assisted others who

needed help. By late adolescence,
they had developed a belief in their
own effectiveness and a conviction
that the problems they confronted
could be overcome by their own actions. They had more realistic education and vocational plans, and
higher expectations for their future
than did their peers with coping
problems.
2. Protective factors in the
family. Children who succeeded
against the odds had the opportunity to establish, early on, a close
bond with at least one competent,
emotionally stable person who was
sensitive to their needs. Much of
this nurturing came from substitute
caregivers, such as grandparents,
older siblings, aunts, and uncles.
Resilient children seemed to be especially adept at “recruiting” such
surrogate parents.
Resilient boys tended to come
from households with structure
and rules, where a male served as a
model of identification, and where
there was encouragement of emotional expressiveness. Resilient girls
tended to come from families that
combined an emphasis on independence with reliable support from a
female caregiver. The families of
these children tended to hold religious beliefs that provided some
stability and meaning in their lives.
3. Protective factors in the
community. Resilient youngsters
tended to rely on elders and peers
in their community for emotional
support and sought them out for
counsel in times of crisis. A favorite teacher was often a positive role
model, so were caring neighbors,
elder mentors, parents of boy- or
girlfriends, youth leaders, ministers,
and members of church groups.
Recovery in Adulthood

One of the most striking findings in our follow-up studies done
in adulthood (at ages 32 and 40) was
that most of the youth who had developed serious coping problems in
adolescence had staged a recovery
by the time they reached midlife.

This was true for the majority of
the “troubled teens,” but more so
for the females than the males.
Overall, the “troubled” teenagers had slightly higher mortality
rates by age forty (4.4%) than their
resilient peers (3.3%) and the “lowrisk” members of the same birth
cohort (2.8%), with more fatalities
due to accidents and AIDS. The
majority of the survivors, however,
had no serious coping problems by
the time they reached midlife. They
were in stable marriages and jobs,
were satisfied with their relationships with their spouses and children, and were responsible citizens
in their community.
Several turning points led to
lasting positive shift in the life trajectories among the high-risk men and
women in our cohort who had been
troubled teenagers. These changes
took place after they had left high
school and without the benefit of
planned intervention by professional “experts.” One of the most
import lessons we learned from our
follow-up in adulthood was that the
opening of opportunities in the third
and fourth decade of life led to enduring positive changes among the
majority of teenage mothers, the
delinquent boys, and the individuals who had struggled with mental
health problems in their teens.
Among the most potent forces
for positive change for these youth
in adulthood were continuing education at community colleges and
adult high schools, educational and
vocational skills acquired during
service in the armed forces, marriage to a stable partner, conversion
to a religion that demanded active
participation in a “community of
faith,” recovery from a life-threatening illness or accident, and, to a
much lesser extent, psychotherapy.
Attendance at community colleges and enlistment in the armed
forces provided “troubled” teenagers with the opportunity to obtain
educational, vocational, and social
skills that made it possible for them
to move out of welfare dependence

Regional Research Institute for Human Services, Portland State University. This article and others can be found at www.rtc.pdx.edu
For reprints or permission to reproduce articles at no charge, please contact the publications coordinator at 503.725.4175;
fax 503.725.4180 or email rtcpubs@pdx.edu
FOCAL POiNT Research, Policy, and Practice in Children’s Mental Health Summer 2005, Vol. 19 No. 1, pages 11-14

into a competitive job market. Such
effects also carried forward to their
children. Both the teenage mothers
and the former delinquents who had
made use of educational opportunities that were available to them in
adulthood were eager to see their
own sons and daughters succeed in
school.
Marriage to a stable partner, whom they considered a
close friend, was another positive turning point. Often it was
a happy second marriage, after
a hastily or impulsively contracted first marriage had ended
in divorce. Such a marriage
provided the once-troubled
partners with a steady source
of emotional support, and with
the opportunity to share their
concerns with a caring person
who bolstered their self-esteem.
Conversion to a religious
faith that provided structure, a
sense of community, and the
assurance of salvation was an
important turning point in the
lives of many troubled teenagers. Most of them were sons
and daughters of alcoholics
who had been abused as children, and who had struggled
with substance abuse problems of
their own.
Some individuals who had
struggled with mental health problems in their teens encountered
a different kind of epiphany that
turned their lives around as they
approached age 40. They had experienced a prolonged and painful
bout with a life-threatening illness
or an accident. A close encounter
with death forced them to examine
the lives they had lived and to consider the opportunities for positive
change they would seize when they
recovered.
Formal psychotherapy had
worked with only a few troubled
individuals (some 5%) who tended
to be better educated and were of a
more introspective bent. The majority in this group relied on medication that relieved anxiety or depres-

sion rather than on “talk therapy”
that provided insight. The majority
of the men and women consistently
ranked the effectiveness of mental
health professionals (whether psychiatrists, psychologists, or social
workers) much lower than the counsel and advice given by spouses,

friends, members of the extended
family, teachers, mentors, co-workers, members of church groups, or
ministers. Their low opinion of the
effectiveness of professional help by
mental health specialists did not improve from the second to the third
and to the fourth decade of life.
Factors Contributing to the
Recovery of Troubled Teens

The “troubled” individuals
who made use of informal opportunities in their twenties and thirties,
and whose lives subsequently took
a positive turn, differed in significant ways from those who did not
make use of such options. They
were active and sociable, had better
problem-solving and reading skills,
and had been exposed to more positive interactions with caregivers in
infancy and early childhood. In

general, the outlook in adulthood
for individuals who had been shy or
lacked self-confidence as children or
adolescents was more positive than
for those who had displayed frequent anti-social behavior, and for
youths whose parents had chronic
mental health and/or alcohol abuse
problems.
When we examined
the links between individual
dispositions and external
sources of support in the
family and community, we
discovered that the resilient
men and women were not
passively reacting to the constraints of negative circumstances. Instead, they actively sought out the people and
opportunities that led to a
positive turnaround in their
lives. The youth who made
a successful adaptation in
adulthood despite adversity
relied on sources of support
within their family and community that increased their
competencies and self-efficacy, decreased the number
of stressful life events they
subsequently encountered,
and opened up new opportunities for them.
Future Directions

Most of our findings have
since been replicated in a number of longitudinal studies around
the world—on the mainland in
the U.S.A., and in Australia, New
Zealand, Denmark, Sweden, Great
Britain, and Germany (Werner,
2005). In all of these studies, one
can discern a common core of individual dispositions and sources of
social support that contribute to resilience. These protective buffers appear to make a more significant impact on the life course of individuals
who thrive despite adversity than
do specific risk factors and stressful life events, and they transcend
ethnic and social class boundaries.
Many of the protective factors that
fostered resilience among those ex-

Regional Research Institute for Human Services, Portland State University. This article and others can be found at www.rtc.pdx.edu
For reprints or permission to reproduce articles at no charge, please contact the publications coordinator at 503.725.4175;
fax 503.725.4180 or email rtcpubs@pdx.edu
FOCAL POiNT Research, Policy, and Practice in Children’s Mental Health Summer 2005, Vol. 19 No. 1, pages 11-14

posed to multiple risk factors were
also beneficial to those who lived in
more favorable environments, but
they did have a stronger predictive
power for positive developmental
outcomes for individuals especially
challenged by adversity (Masten &
Coatsworth, 1998).
Despite this accumulating evidence, the study of resilience across
the life span is still relatively uncharted territory. We urgently need
to explore the “reserve capacity” of
older people who are an increasing
segment of our population—their
potential for change and continued
growth in later life. Future research
on resilience also needs to focus
more explicitly on gender differences in response to adversity. We
have consistently noted that a higher proportion of females than males
managed to cope effectively with
adversity in childhood and adulthood. They relied more frequently
on informal sources of social support than the men. We suspect that
these same gender differences may
also apply to coping with old age.
We need more evidence from
twin, adoptee, and family studies
about the mediating effect of genetic influences that lead to positive
adaptation in the context of adversity. Future research on risk and resilience also needs to acquire a crosscultural perspective that focuses on
the children from developing countries who enter our country in ever
increasing numbers as migrants and
refugees from war-torn countries in
Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Last, but not least, we need to
carefully evaluate intervention programs that aim to foster resilience.
Throughout our study, we observed
large individual differences among
“high-risk” individuals in their responses to adversity as well as to the
opening up of naturally occurring
opportunities. Our findings suggest
that educational, rehabilitation, or
therapeutic programs deliberately
designed to improve the lives of
at-risk children and youth will also
have variable effects, depending on

the dispositions and competencies
of the participants. Thus, we should
exercise some caution in advocating
a particular treatment unless its effectiveness has been independently
evaluated.

Emmy Werner is Research Pro-

fessor of Human Development in
the Department of Human and
Community Development at the
University of California, Davis.

References

Luthar, S. (Ed.). (2003). Resilience
and Vulnerability: Adaptation in
the context of childhood adversities.
New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Masten, A. S., & Coatsworth, J.D.
(1998). Resilience in individual
development: The development
of competence in favorable and
unfavorable environments: Lessons from research on successful
children. American Psychologist,
53, 205 - 220.
Werner, E. E. (2005). What can we
learn about resilience from largescale longitudinal studies? In S.
Goldstein & R. Brooks (Eds.),
Handbook of resilience in children (pp.
91 - 106). New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Werner, E. E., & Smith, R.S. (1982).
Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study of resilient children and
youth. New York: McGraw Hill.
Werner, E. E., & Smith, R.S. (1992).
Overcoming the odds: High-risk children from birth to adulthood. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Werner, E. E., & Smith, R.S. (2001).
Journeys from childhood to midlife:
Risk, resilience and recovery. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.

2005 STAFF of the RESEARCH AND
TRAINING CENTER ON FAMILY SUPPORT AND CHILDREN’S MENTAL
HEALTH
Regional Research Institute for
Human Services
Graduate School of Social Work
Portland State University
PO Box 751, Portland, OR 97207-0751
Voice: 503.725.4040, Fax:
503.725.4180
www.rtc.pdx.edu
Barbara J. Friesen, Director; Janet
S. Walker, Director of Research and
Dissemination; Lynwood J. Gordon,
Associate Director of Training and
Technical Assistance; Donna Fleming,
Center Coordinator; Stacey Sowders
and Anne Thompson, Project Support;
Noah Latz and Cintia Mason, Student
Assistants.
Voices of Youth: Pauline Jivanjee
and Jean Kruzich, Co-Principal
Investigators; Lynwood J. Gordon,
Project Manager; Stephanie Thornley,
Student Mentee; Jan Lacy, Family
Member Research Assistant; Lacey Van
Kirk, Youth Research Assistant.
Transforming Futures: Nancy Koroloff
and JoAnn Sowers, Co-Principal
Investigators; Lynwood J. Gordon,
Project Manager.
Partnerships in Planning: Laurie Powers
and Janet S. Walker, Co-Principal
Investigators; Barbara J. Friesen and
Jean Kruzich, Project Collaborators;
Lisa Stewart, Graduate Research
Assistant.
Work-Life Integration: Julie
Rosenzweig, Eileen Brennan and
Jennifer Bradley, Co-Principal
Investigators; Katherine Huffstutter,
Project Manager.
Transforming Transitions: Jennifer
Bradley, Beth Green and Constance
Lehman, Co-Principal Investigators;
Maria Everhart, Project Manager;
Eileen Brennan, Project Collaborator;
Shane Ama, Research Assistant;
Mary Dallas Allen, Graduate Research
Assistant; Claudia Kis, Student
Mentee.
Practice-Based Evidence: Barbara J.
Friesen and Terry Cross, Co-Principal
Investigators; Pauline Jivanjee and
Janet S. Walker, Project Collaborators;
Jody Becker-Green, Project Associate.
Underrepresented Researchers
Mentoring Program: Pauline Jivanjee,
Project Coordinator; Stephanie
Thornley and Claudia Kis, Mentees.
Learning Community: Barbara Friesen
and Harold Briggs, Co-Principal
Investigators; Jennifer Bradley, Project
Coordinator.
Building on Family Strengths
Conference: Lynwood J. Gordon
and Donna Fleming, Co-Conference
Coordinators; Stacey Sowders and
Anne Thompson, Support Staff.
Publications: Stacey Sowders and Anne
Thompson, Publication Coordinators;
Noah Latz and Cintia Mason, Student
Publications Assistants.
We invite our audience to submit
letters and comments:
Janet S. Walker, Editor, janetw@pdx.
edu
Publications Coordinator, rtcpubs@pdx.
edu

Regional Research Institute for Human Services, Portland State University. This article and others can be found at www.rtc.pdx.edu
For reprints or permission to reproduce articles at no charge, please contact the publications coordinator at 503.725.4175;
fax 503.725.4180 or email rtcpubs@pdx.edu
FOCAL POiNT Research, Policy, and Practice in Children’s Mental Health Summer 2005, Vol. 19 No. 1, pages 11-14

