Educational Psychology Review, Vol. 3, No. 4, 1991

Emotional Regulation and Emotional
Development
Ross A. Thompson 1

Current neofunctionalist views of emotion underscore the biologically adaptive
and psychologically constructive contributions of emotion to organized
behavior, but little is known of the development of the emotional regulatory
processes by which this is fostered. Emotional regulation refers to the extrinsic
and intrinsic processes responsible for monitoring, evaluating, and modifying
emotional reactions. This review provides a developmental outline of emotional
regulation and its relation to emotional development throughout the life-span.
The biological foundations of emotional self-regulation and individual
differences in regulatory tendencies are summarized. Extrinsic influences on
the early regulation of a child's emotion and their long-term significance are
then discussed, including a parent's direct intervention strategies, selective
reinforcement and modeling processes, affective induction, and the caregiver's
ecological control of opportunity for heightened emotion and its management.
Intrinsic contributors to the growth of emotional self-regulatory capacities
include the emergence of language and cognitive skills, the child's growing
emotional and self-understanding (and cognized strategies of emotional
self-control), and the emergence of a "theory of personal emotion" in
adolescence.
KEY WORDS: emotion; self-regulation; development.

INTRODUCTION
Recent neofunctionalist views of emotion have underscored the biologically adaptive and psychologically constructive contributions of emotion
to competent and strategic behavior (e.g., Barrett and Campos, 1987;
1Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska, 209 Burnett Hall, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588-0308.
269

1040-726X/91/1200-0269506.50/0© 1991PlenumPublishingCorporation

270

Thompson

Bretherton, Fritz, Zahn-Waxler, and Ridgeway, 1986: Campos, Barrett,
Lamb, Goldsmith, and Stenberg, 1983; Campos, Campos, and Barrett, 1989;
Malatesta, 1990; Saarni and Harris, 1989). Contrary to traditional formulations that emphasized how the irrational and stressful features of emotional arousal make it difficult to maintain competent functioning, these
newer views emphasize how emotions organize social communication and
interaction, personality processes, goal-achievement, and cognitive processing from an early age. Informed by bioevolutionary models of emotion in
human adaptation, neofunctionalist views note that while emotional arousal
retains its capacity to undermine healthy functioning, it also motivates and
guides, even in children, adaptive behavioral processes as diverse as empathy (e.g., Hoffman, 1982), memory retrieval (Fagan, Ohr, Fleckenstein,
and Ribner, 1985), parent-infant interaction (Gianino and Tronick, 1988),
attachment (Thompson, Connell, and Bridges, 1988), and self- and otherunderstanding (Bretherton, McNew, and Beeghly-Smith, 1981). Emotion
can thus be a "behavior regulator" (cf. Klinnert, Campos, Sorce, Erode,
and Svejda, 1983) as well as a detriment to competency.
This paper addresses an important but somewhat neglected aspect of
this emerging viewpoint: the development of emotional regulatory processes. In many respects, the capacity of emotion to promote or undermine
constructive functioning depends on the extent to which emotional arousal
is monitored, evaluated, and (if necessary) controlled by the individual. In
a sense, emotional arousal must itself be regulated for emotion to helpfully
guide competent functioning. This is true not because emotional arousal
p e r se is disorganizing, but because its biologically and psychologically adaptive motivational and organizational characteristics are contingent on
arousal remaining within the individual's capacities to cope. This is especially evident in developmental analysis. Emotional arousal is regulated primarily by others early in life as caregivers monitor and regulate the baby's
distress, promote positive affect, and direct the emergence of self-referent
emotions, e.g., guilt and pride. But emotional arousal becomes increasingly
self-regulated as the result of neurophysiological development, the growth
of cognitive and linguistic skills, and the emergence of emotional and selfunderstanding. As a consequence, whereas the newborn infant may cry uncontrollably when distressed, the toddler is capable of seeking assistance,
the preschooler can reflect upon and talk about her feelings, the school-age
child can re-direct attention and use other deliberate strategies to reduce
distress (and can control its expression to others), and the adolescent has
sufficient self-understanding to evoke more personal, idiosyncratic selfregulatory strategies. These developmental changes not only render the
child better capable of maintaining satisfying emotional homeostasis, but

Emotional Regulation and Development

271

also permit her to enlist emotional arousal more successfully in ongoing
transactions with the social and nonsocial surroundings.
Although there has been considerable interest, therefore, in emotion
as a regulator of other developmental processes (cf. Campos et al., 1989),
there has been little attention to how emotion itself is regulated and how
capacities for emotional regulation affect the course of emotional development. The purpose of this paper is to offer a developmental outline of the
latter (see also Thompson, 1990).

EMOTIONAL REGULATION AND BEHAVIORAL
DEVELOPMENT
Emotional regulation may be defined as the extrinsic and intrinsic
processes responsible for monitoring, evaluating, and modifying emotional
reactions, especially their intensive and temporal features. Biologically,
emotions organize and coordinate multi-system responses to significant environmental events (e.g., Levenson, 1988). Thus, emotional regulatory
processes are necessary both to provide flexibility (rather than stereotypy)
to the behavioral processes that emotions help to motivate and direct, and
also to enable organisms to respond quickly and efficiently to changes in
their conditions by maintaining internal arousal within performance-enhancing limits. Not surprisingly, therefore, the evolution of higher-order
cortical functions has fostered inhibitory controls over subcortical emotive
processes (Panksepp, 1989), although inhibitory as well as excitatory processes related to emotional arousal can be found at various levels of nervous system organization (e.g., Dawson and Panagiotides, in press; Gunnar,
1986; Porges, 1991). Thus, although humans may be evolutionarily
equipped with a basic repertoire of primary emotions (cf. Izard and Malatesta, 1987), there are also biological foundations to emotional regulatory
processes that significantly alter these primary emotional experiences that
have evolved to provide increased flexibility and efficiency to emotive motivational systems.
Psychologically, emotional regulation is a painstaking developmental
process because it requires intervening into phylogenetically deeply-rooted
affect systems with psychologically complex control mechanisms. For this
reason, the management of emotion is an important component of "emotional maturity" (Jersild, 1954) and "emotional competence" (Gordon,
1989; Saarni, 1990). The growth of emotional regulatory capacities is a significant part of emotional development, because as emotion is externally
managed and increasingly self-regulated with development, emotional experience becomes socialized, acquires new meaning for the individual, can

272

Thompson

be self-controlled and used purposively, and can thus be integrated into
the child's growing repertoire of strategic behavioral processes. A broadening range of emotional regulatory competencies thus assists the child's
own behavioral self-regulation while also channeling emotional experience
in ways consistent with the "emotional culture" (Gordon, 1989) in which
the child is raised.
This is illustrated by a recent ethnographic study of three mothers and
their 2 1/2-year-old girls in a blue-collar neighborhood in South Baltimore
(Miller and Moore, 1989; Miller and Sperry, 1987, 1988). These mothers
used a variety of deliberate socialization strategies to emotionally "toughen"
their young offspring and guide their expressions of anger in light of the
demands for assertiveness and self-defense in their inner-city neighborhood.
These strategies included selectively reinforcing justified aggressive outbursts
but rewarding self-control when aggression was unjustified or inappropriate;
provoking mock "practice" episodes of aggression; fostering the child's anger
when self-defense seemed warranted; and using verbal comments to interpret, challenge, warn, or pacify the child. As a consequence, their young
offspring possessed a varied repertoire for expressing anger and learned to
regulate, evoke, or disinhibit feelings of anger in subculture-specific ways.
These socialization processes have functional value for children in the settings in which they are growing up, but they may also be dysfunctional in
other interactive contexts. Self-assertiveness is not likely to benefit the child
in subcultural settings with different values, for example, such as in the
authority relations between students and teachers, or later between employees and employers. In these contexts, the effects of the child's socialized
strategies of emotional management are much different because the meaning and interpretation of their emotional expressions is different outside the
neighborhood in which they are appropriate. Thus, emotional regulatory
processes help to channel the meaning and significance of emotional arousal
in adaptive ways in particular contexts.
Another reason for the importance of emotional regulation to emotional development is that an understanding of emotional regulation provides a window into the growth of individual differences in personality and
social functioning. Individual differences in infants' reactions to strangers
and separation are indexed primarily by variations in emotionality (e.g.,
Thompson and Limber, 1990). Variations in the quality of peer relationships are related to the child's emotional self-regulatory skills (e.g., Gottman and Mettetal, 1986). Moreover, there is considerable evidence that
variations in the security of infant-parent attachment are related to the
child's ability to cope with the stress of infant-mother separation in the
Strange Situation. These coping capacities depend, in part, on the amount
of prior experience with separation (cf. Miyake, Chen, and Campos, 1985;

Emotional Regulation and Development

273

Sagi, Lamb, Lewkowicz, Shoham, Dvir, and Estes, 1985), support from the
caregiver (Dickstein, Thompson, Estes, Malkin, and Lamb, 1984), temperamental vulnerability (Gunnar, Mangelsdorf, Kestenbaum, Lang, Larson,
and Andreas, 1991), and congenital characteristics (Stiefel, Plunkett, and
Meisels, 1987; Thompson, Cicchetti, Lamb, and Malkin, 1985), as well as
the development of early emotional self-regulatory capacities (Thompson
et al., 1988). Emotional regulatory skills are also related to problems in
peer relationships (Rubin and Rose-Krasnor, 1986, in press), such as with
children whose anger and social inferences lead to aggression against agemates (Dodge, 1991; Dodge, Pettit, McClaskey, and Brown, 1986), or with
children who are socially withdrawn because of shyness. Taken together,
the growth of emotional regulatory skills may provide a developmental
foundation for the emergence of social competence.
Similarly, individual differences in significant dimensions of child temperament, personality, or behavioral style (e.g., dominant mood, approachwithdrawal, or threshold of responsiveness) may also have their roots in
variations in emotional regulatory competencies (the same is true of adults
with respect to dominant personality dimensions like warmth and extraversion). As revealed in the studies by Kagan (Kagan, Reznick, and Gibbons,
1989; Kagan, Reznick, and Snidman, 1987) and Fox (1989a,b), for example,
physiologically-based individual differences in the functioning of neural
structures modulating emotionality are associated with behavioral markers
of wariness, fearfulness, and inhibition. These differences in emotional and
behavioral style are also influenced by caregiving interventions (see Kagan
et al., 1987). Thus, physiologically- and experientially-based tendencies related to the management and control of emotional arousal have broad implications for an individual's style of engagement with the social and
nonsocial world. The studies by Kagan and Fox suggest that if emotional
regulatory processes shape the quality of emotional experience for an individual in ways that promote a withdrawn or outgoing behavioral style,
then variations in regulatory skills or tendencies may help explain why emotional arousal means different things to different individuals throughout
the life-span (e.g., for some, the arousal of anger is empowering such that
for example, and for others, it is to be denied or avoided). Emotional regulation underlies many differences in social and personality functioning.
Another reason for the importance of emotional regulation is that
emotional regulatory processes are linked to cognitive functioning and academic achievement. Emotional self-management is required for the attentional and problem-solving strategies necessary for effective cognitive
performance, especially in tasks involving delay, inhibition, or the substitution of long-term goals for immediate incentives (e.g., Mischel and Mischel,
1977, 1983). They influence academic performance as they are enlisted in

274

Thompson

managing performance stress, including test anxiety. Emotion management
may also be significant during performance evaluations, especially for coping with the emotions engendered by academic successes and failures and
their causal implications (e.g., Graham, 1991; Graham and Weiner, 1986),
particularly as they relate to perceptions of competence and self-confidence. Finally, when children encounter distressing situations at home or
elsewhere, their skills at emotional self-regulation may determine whether
these situations impair academic performance or not (e.g., Hetherington,
Cox, and Cox, 1982).
Finally, emotional regulatory processes are important because of their
relevance to the study of child clinical disorders and their etiology and
treatment. This is because many childhood disorders entail affective dimensions, and problems in emotional self-regulation define many behavioral
problems of childhood and adolescence (e.g., Achenbach and Edelbrock,
1983). Moreover, as developmental psychopathologists have long recognized (cf. Rutter and Garmezy, 1983), understanding normative developmental processes such as those related to emotional regulation can provide
added insight into the origins of early psychological disorders. The offspring
of parents with depressive or bipolar disorders, for example, are themselves
at risk for affective disorders, in part because of how the parent's disorder
imposes demands on the child's nascent emotional self-regulatory capacities
(see Zahn-Waxler and Kochanska, 1990). On the other hand, the study of
Down Syndrome infants and children reveals how the physiological processes governing emotional regulation in normal and atypical populations
can account for the more subdued, dampened emotionality of these children (Cicchetti, 1990; Thompson et al., 1985). In each case, normative processes of emotional regulation figure prominently in understanding the
origins and characteristics of these clinical disorders.
The relevance of emotional regulation to the understanding of child
clinical disorders is especially apparent in the study of child maltreatment
(e.g., Cicchetti, 1990). The socioemotional sequelae of maltreatment are
apparent as early as infancy, and are especially manifested in disorders of
emotional regulation. In Gaensbauer's evocative analyses, for example,
abused or neglected infants observed in episodes of social interaction with
a play partner displayed signs of regulatory dysfunction, including abrupt
and unpredictable changes in mood, the "compartmentalization" of affect
to specific eliciting conditions, shallowness, ambiguity, or ambivalence in
emotional expressions, and infrequent expressions of pleasure (Gaensbauer,
1982; Gaensbauer and Mrazek, 1981; Gaensbauer and Sands, 1979). In my
own preliminary re-analyses of these data, these infants have also exhibited
a marked and generalized "shutting down" of affective responsiveness. In
many respects, these infants are vulnerable owing either to precocious, en-

Emotional Regulation and Development

275

hanced capabilities in emotional management (what might be called "overregulation" of emotion), or deficient abilities in coping with their emotional
arousal. At older ages, maltreated children exhibit an acute sensitivity to
aggressive stimuli, are more likely to perceive ambiguous situations as
threatening, are more prone to angry, frustrated, and aggressive outbursts,
and also exhibit socioemotionally withdrawn, avoidant behavior (see Aber
and Cicchetti, 1984; and Cicchetti, 1990 for reviews). The origins of these
disorders of emotional regulation are complex, but it is noteworthy that
the parents of maltreated infants and children exhibit less positive and more
negative emotion toward their offspring (e.g., Burgess and Conger, 1978;
Lewis and Schaeffer, 1981) and, in particular, tend to misidentify and respond inappropriately to the affective expressions of young children (e.g.,
Frodi and Lamb, 1980; Kropp and Haynes, 1987). It seems likely, therefore,
that through direct and indirect socialization processes, the emotional regulatory capabilities of infants and young children are shaped by the "emotional climate" of the home, for both maltreated and nonmaltreated
populations.
Taken together, these research literatures indicate both that emotional arousal can serve valuable purposes in organizing and motivating
adaptive behavioral processes, but that its capacity to do so depends, in
part, on the processes by which emotion is itself monitored, evaluated, and
modified by the individual. The development of these emotional regulatory
p r o c e s s e s - involving both extrinsic and emerging intrinsic capacities for
managing emotional a r o u s a l - is a life-span process, involving an ongoing
dialectic between the individual and the demands of the social surroundings. I now turn to an overview of some of the major influences on this
developmental process.

BIOLOGICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF EMOTIONAL
REGULATION

Normative Changes in Nervous System Functioning
As noted earlier, the management of emotion - - whether through extrinsic influences or through self-regulation - - is built upon systems of nervous system organization that have evolved to provide flexibility, efficiency,
and control over emotive motivational processes. Some of these systems
are immature at birth, and thus some of the neurological prerequisites of
emotional regulatory processes are not fully functional early in infancy. Parents of young babies discover this to be true when, despite their concerted
efforts to regulate the infant's arousal states, the newborn shifts unpre-

276

Thompson

dictably and erratically from quiescence to heightened distress, and back
again, and shows few genuine indicators of positive emotion.
Although surprisingly little is known about these emerging systems
of nervous system organization, existing research indicates that two processes, occurring simultaneously, are related to the development of excitatory and inhibitory emotive processes early in infancy. First, diffuse
excitatory processes are functionally active from birth but decline in lability
throughout the first year, especially those related to adrenocortical activity
(Gunnar, 1986; Gunnar et al., 1991; Gunnar, Mangelsdorf, Larson, and
Hertzgaard, 1989; Gunnar, Marvinney, Isensee, and Fisch, 1989). At the
same time, parasympathetic activity assumes an important role in arousal
regulation (Porges, 1991). As a consequence, organismic arousal gradually
assumes less of the reactive, all-or-none character of the immediate postnatal period.
Second, cortical inhibitory controls over emotive systems emerge more
slowly during infancy and may not become fully functional until long after
birth. There appear to be at least two important transitions in their emergence, however. The first occurs at 2-4 months of age with the growth of
rudimentary forebrain inhibitory centers, and this is reflected in behavioral
state changes (e.g., the gradual suppression of neonatal reflexes, the emergence of more regular sleep-wake patterns, greater regularity and control
of behavioral state, etc.), and emotional changes (e.g., an increase in exogenous smiling and a decline in unexplained fussiness, growing emotional responsiveness to contingent stimulation, and a capacity for laughter) (Emde,
Gaensbauer, and Harmon, 1976; Sroufe and Wunsch, 1972; Watson, 1972;
Watson and Ramey, 1972). This growing environmental responsiveness may
have its roots in the emergence of rudimentary cortical inhibitory systems
that exert regulatory control over fluctuations in behavioral state and permit
the infant to attend and respond to situational events.
A second transition occurs at about 9-10 months of age, and is associated with developmental changes in frontal lobe activity and hemispheric specialization related to emotion. Diamond (1988a,b) has argued
that a capacity for response inhibition emerges at this time because of the
maturation of the frontal cortex (specifically the dorsal-lateral prefrontal
cortex) which facilitates inhibitory control over initial response tendencies.
As applied to cognitive processing, this enables infants to override initial
response tendencies to permit memory-based approaches (such as those
required for correct solution of Piaget's A-not-B problem) and goaldirected behavior. The same frontally-mediated inhibitory processes may
also regulate excitatory processes related to emotional arousal (Dawson and
Panagiotides, in press). In addition, there is considerable evidence that
many cognitive and affective functions are cerebrally lateralized by this time

Emotional Regulation and Development

277

(see Kinsbourne and Hiscock, 1983), with relatively greater left frontal activation occurring in situations eliciting approach/positive emotionality, and
relatively greater right frontal activation occurring in situations evoking
withdrawal/negative emotion (Davidson and Fox, 1982; Fox and Davidson,
1987, 1988, 1991). Fox and Davidson (1984) have argued that right and
left frontal lobes may increasingly exert mutual regulatory control during
the 9- to 12-month period because of their connections to common subcortical structures, their growing functional maturity (cf. Diamond's work),
and the maturation of transcollosal fibers during this period. Most notably,
the left frontal cortex assists in the management of right hemispheric activation related to withdrawal/negative emotion, according to Fox and
Davidson (1984; see also Tucker and Frederick, 1989). This is manifested
not only in a greater capacity for emotional response inhibition but also
in the emergence of more complex affective reactions (e.g., emotional
blends).
Taken together, therefore, the first year of life witnesses the growth
of emotional regulatory capacities owing both to the consolidation and stability of excitatory systems and the progressive maturation of cortical inhibitory processes, especially in the frontal lobe. Because the latter is an
extended developmental process--lasting well into childhood (Fox and
Davidson, 1984; Kinsbourne and Bemporad, 1 9 8 4 ) - it appears that neurophysiological maturation contributes to the growth of emotional selfo
regulatory capacities in the early years of life, although considerably more
research is required to confirm and extend this speculative analysis.
Individual Differences in Nervous System Reactivity
In addition to these normative developmental changes, researchers
have also been interested in the neurophysiological processes governing individual differences in emotionality and emotional regulation. Much of this
interest has centered on differences in temperament: variations in behavioral style that are presumed to have a constitutional and/or hereditary basis. Despite considerable differences in how theories define temperament,
most temperamental theories underscore individual differences in emotionality, and at least one prominent theory (i.e., Rothbart and Derryberry,
1981) emphasizes the self-regulatory aspects of temperament (see Bates,
1987; Goldsmith, Buss, Plomin, Rothbart, Thomas, Chess, Hinde, and McCall, 1987 for reviews). To Rothbart and Derryberry, temperament consists
of "constitutional differences in reactivity and self-regulation" (Derryberry
and Rothbart, 1984, p. 132) in which positive and negative emotion and
their regulatory features assume a prominent role (Derryberry and

278

Thompson

Rothbart, 1984; Rothbart and Derryberry, 1981; Rothbart and Posner,
1985). In her infancy studies, for example, Rothbart has examined individual differences in smiling and laughter, fear, anger and frustration, and
soothability in terms of regulatory response parameters such as latency, intensity, rise-time, and recovery of emotional reactions (e.g., Rothbart,
1981). In their theoretical work, Rothbart and her collaborators emphasize
the neurophysiological, endocrinological, and other biological bases of temperamental individuality, but also underscore developmental changes in
temperament as these systems mature and reorganize throughout the lifespan (see Rothbart and Posner, 1985).
There are emerging research findings elucidating the links between
these neurophysiological processes and temperamental manifestations of
emotional self-regulatory processes that give credence to this view. In particular, in his longitudinal study of behaviorally inhibited and uninhibited
young children, Kagan has suggested that inhibited children have a generally lower threshold of reactivity in limbic structures mediating fear and
defense (i.e., the amygdala and/or hypothalamus), and this is manifested
in differences in autonomic measures (e.g., higher heart rate, salivary cortisol, and urinary epinephrine levels) and behavioral measures reflecting
heightened fearful, wary, and shy behavior (see Kagan et al., 1987 for a
review). In a similar vein, Fox (1989a,b; Stifter and Fox, 1990) has compared groups of infants who differ on cardiac measures of autonomic functioning and found that infants with higher and more stable heart rates were
emotionally less reactive and more wary in repeated assessments over the
first 2 years of life, and he has interpreted these differences in terms of
parasympathetic regulation (rather than sympathetic activation). Evidence
adduced from each set of studies strongly suggests, therefore, that individual differences in physiological reactivity and regulation underlie significant
differences in emotionality and its regulation, consistent with the views of
temperamental theory. Furthermore, there is some evidence for the heritability of these individual differences in neurobehavioral functioning
(Healy, Fox, and Porges, 1988).
Although these findings are provocative, they should not be interpreted as suggesting that individual differences in temperament or emotional
regulation are unchanging or immutable because of their biological basis.
As noted earlier, Kagan discovered that behavioral manifestations of infants'
inhibition were influenced by caregivers' socialization efforts (Kagan et al.,
1987), and this observation is consistent with views underscoring the importance of the "goodness of fit" (Lerner and Lerner, 1983) or "match" (Buss
and Plomin, 1984) between a child's temperamental characteristics and environmental demands. Furthermore, Dienstbier (1989) has argued that experiences of intermittent s t r e s s - - s u c h as those provided by mental

Emotional Regulation and Development

279

challenges, aerobic exercise, or other challenges to the individual - - can alter
the physiological systems governing emotional and stress reactions in humans by facilitating resistance to neuroendocrine depletion and by enhancing catecholamine capacity. As a consequence, these experiences not only
foster better performance in future situations involving organismic activation, but can have long-term effects on emotional and personality functioning. Taken together, therefore, although individual differences in aspects of
emotional regulation have important neurobiological constituents, there remains considerable flexibility to these differences arising from one's history
of experiences.

EXTRINSIC REGULATION OF EMOTION IN INFANCY
Although young infants are capable of a limited repertoire of selfsoothing behaviors (e.g., sucking on hands or fingers, visual avoidance, withdrawal, and rocking) (see Gianino and Tronick, 1988; Lipsitt, 1983; Kessen
and Mandler, 1961), these behaviors have little effectiveness when elicitors
persist or arousal is very high, and thus infants must rely on the assistance
of caregivers to regulate their emotional arousal (Karraker and Lake, 1991).
Adults can remove the source of distress when infants are incapable of
doing so for themselves, and can provide other assists (e.g., a pacifier, a
favorite toy, cuddling, etc.) that can foster the management of arousal
(Campos, 1989). These interventions are the earliest ways in which emotion
is extrinsically regulated, and they are important not only because of their
immediate effects on the child's arousal, but also because they contribute
to the socialization of emotional experience in accord with sociocultural
beliefs about the suitability of different emotions and their expression and
intensity that constitute the "emotional culture" (Gordon, 1989). Parents
intervene into the emotional life of offspring, in other words, in accord
with their personal beliefs and cultural values concerning emotion and its
expression, and these interventions thus socialize emotional experience
from infancy. And as we shall note below, the extrinsic regulation of emotion continues throughout life, although after infancy it is increasingly supplemented by the individual's own self-regulatory efforts. The individual
also construes the effects of the emotional culture in idiosyncratic ways,
and selects settings and demands that provide further support to emotional
self-regulation.
Several modes of extrinsic emotional regulation appear earliest in infancy. These include the immediate and long-term effects of the caregiver's
direct intervention strategies, the influence of selective reinforcement and
modeling practices, the effects of affective induction on the child's emo-

280

Thompson

tional experience, and the caregiver's control of opportunity for emotional
arousal and its management.

Direct Intervention

Strategies

Clearly, the promptness and efficacy of the caregiver's interventions
- - especially when the baby is distressed - - influence the child's immediate
emotional experience but may also affect the child's reliance on the
caregiver for assistance on future occasions. As Lamb (1981a,b) has argued,
"distress-relief sequences" are highly salient early experiences involving
contingent associations between the infant's distress and the caregiver's
ministrations. These characteristics make early experiences optimal learning
opportunities for the development of social expectations. When caregivers
respond promptly and contingently, the states of quiet alertness that result
(Korner and Thoman, 1970, 1972) foster the child's conditioned association
of the caregiver's cues with the relief of distress. Indirect evidence supporting this formulation comes from studies by Gekoski, Rovee-Collier, and
Carulii-Rabinowitz (1983) and Lamb and Malkin (1986) showing that infants as young as 1-2 months old quieted in anticipation of the caregiver's
assistance when hearing or seeing the adult's arrival before being picked
up and comforted. Anticipatory quieting increased during the early months
of life, and infants protested when the caregiver approached but did not
pick up the baby. These findings are consistent with the view that social
expectations concerning the adult's assistance are developing during this
period. Indeed, these expectations probably underlie the child's stress-tolerance when the adult's assistance can be anticipated, which is a hallmark
of a secure attachment (cf. Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, and Wall, 1978;
Lamb, Thompson, Gardner, and Charnov, 1985).
The caregiver's direct intervention strategies also may influence the
regulation of emotion in another way. Insofar as infants experience a relatively consistent history of experiences concerning distress arousal and
caregiver responsiveness, they may acquire distinct styles of emotional regulation based on the adult's intervention strategies and their effectiveness.
For example, parents who regularly permit the child's distress to escalate
to high levels before intervening not only reinforce the child's rapid escalation of distress intensity, but also may contribute to the child's more limited soothability (since highly distressed babies are more difficult to
comfort). Conversely, caregivers who respond more immediately may foster
the child's own emerging self-regulatory efforts by keeping the child's
arousal within manageable limits through their own interventions.

Emotional Regulation and Development

281

The importance of direct intervention strategies extends beyond infancy. As children grow older, however, parents intervene in more differentiated ways to emotional expressions of offspring, and seek to regulate
these expressions in accordance with the "emotional culture" (cf. Gordon,
1989; Miller and Sperry, 1987). For example, Brooks-Gunn and Lewis
(1982) noted that over the first 3 years of the child's life, mothers became
significantly more responsive to smiles, less responsive to frets and cries,
and more responsive to nondistressed vocalizations of o f f s p r i n g - consistent with changing social expectations concerning the expression of positive
and negative emotion by infants and preschoolers (see Lewis and Michalson, 1983). It is likely that parents also respond distinctively to expressions
of distress, anger, fear, and other negative emotions over the same period.
Moreover, their interventions are increasingly accompanied by meta-emotive messages (e.g., "big boys don't cry when they don't get what they
want!") that shape the child's emerging representations of emotion and its
regulation, as we shall see below. In these ways, therefore, direct intervention strategies remain important influences in the extrinsic regulation of
emotion and its socialization.
Selective Reinforcement and Modeling

Not only distress but positive emotions are regulated in infancy as
caregivers seek to enhance the latter while minimizing the former. One way
to do so is through selective reinforcement and modeling of emotional behavior, which have been studied most frequently in the context of motherinfant face-to-face play interactions (Fogel, 1982; Gianino and Tronick,
1988; Tronick, Cohn, and Shea, 1986). These interactions are important arenas for the extrinsic regulation of emotion because play activity itself fosters
heightened arousal that must be managed to maintain a pleasant encounter.
For this reason, one of the caregiver's goals during face-to-face exchanges
is to maintain an optimal level of arousal in the baby that sustains interest
and pleasure without the child becoming overaroused and distressed. This
is accomplished by monitoring the child's emotional and attentional cues
and responding sensitively to signs of disinterest, distress, or fatigue (e.g.,
Brazelton, Koslowski, and Main, 1974: Field, 1981; Stern, 1974, 1977;
Thompson and Lamb, 1983). The successful outcome of these efforts is not
only pleasant play exchanges, but also the enhancement of the child's emerging capacities to cope with states of heightened excitement, or what one
researcher has called "affective tolerance" (Fogel, 1982).
In microanalyses of mother-infant interaction, Malatesta (1990;
Malatesta, Culver, Tesman, and Shepard, 1989; Malatesta, Grigoryev,

282

Thompson

Lamb, Albin, and Culver, 1986; Malatesta and Haviland, 1982) has reported
that when playing with their babies, mothers restricted their facial expressions primarily to positive emotions (e.g., enjoyment, interest, and surprise),
and also imitated many infant facial expressions, especially those of positive
emotions. In other words, infants who smiled were greeted with mothers
who smiled in return; those who fussed had mothers who quickly acted to
re-direct the baby's emotional response more positively. In this manner, it
appears mothers sought to accentuate, modulate, and regulate their offspring's positive emotional experience in play. These patterns of selective
reinforcement and modeling may help to explain the linear increase in positive emotional expressions observed in these babies as they grew older, as
well as the similarity between mothers and infants in their expressive styles
(Malatesta and Izard, 1984). Moreover, there is reason to believe that these
interactive experiences also foster the child's nascent skills at emotional
management by providing the baby with frequent experiences of heightened
arousal that are maintained within the child's capacities to hope. As a consequence of experiences that foster "affective tolerance," in other words,
the baby's tolerance of heightened arousal in other contexts may also be
fostered.
Parents continue to use selective reinforcement and modeling as
modes of extrinsic emotional regulation throughout a child's early years
(cf. Miller annd Sperry, 1987). As noted earlier, parental approaches become more multifaceted, including verbal instruction, and more emotionspecific as the child matures. For example, parents' modeling and their
expectations for the management of anger may lead some children to voice
angry feelings with explosive words and gestures, others to become distressed, others to minimize the direct expression of anger, and still others
to lose control in temper tantrums and other outbursts. Similar processes
are likely to apply to how children learn to cope with feelings of disappointment, frustration, pride, and other emotions. In general, parents are
more likely to reward self-controlled emotional displays than uncontrolled
expressions, in accord with socialization goals related to the emotional culture. This makes emotional regulation and the regulation of emotional displays important socialization goals in childhood.
As these examples suggest, however, the consequences of parental
selective reinforcement and modeling may sometimes be unintended. ZahnWaxler and Kochanska (1990) have noted, for example, that (1) the offspring of depressed mothers often experience heightened guilt owing to
the mother's modeling of negative attributional styles, and (2) that younger
offspring have special difficulties in regulating interpersonal emotions like
empathy and guilt because of their experiences with a depressed caregiver
who exhibits negative affect and helplessness and who uses guilt-inductive

Emotional Regulation and Development

283

disciplinary practices. In such cases, the detrimental effects of parental reinforcement and modeling practices are combined with other emotional demands on the child that undermine rather than foster effective emotional
regulation.

Affective Induction

Selective reinforcement and modeling may not alone affect the baby's
emotional experience with the mother during episodes of face-to-face play.
Another influence may be the emotional tone of the mother's behavior. Haviland and Lelwica (1987) reported that the facial expressions of 10-week-olds
frequently matched the posed facial expressions of their mothers for emotions of joy and anger, and that their responses to maternal expressions of
sadness were also distinctive. Termine and Izard (1988) similarly reported
that 9-month-olds showed more joy, played more, and looked more at their
mothers when mothers displayed positive emotion. They showed more sadness and anger and looked away when mothers displayed sadness. These
provocative findings suggest that in these and other situations, a baby's emotional experience may be regulated by a variety of experiences of emotional
contagion or induction in which a caregiver can influence, either deliberately
or unintentionally, the child's emotional experience.
Affective induction as an extrinsic mode of emotional regulation can
be observed not only in face-to-face play but in other interactive contexts
during which caregivers provide an emotionally resonant response to the
baby's emotional expressions (e.g., a resounding "yeah!" when the child
smiles and exuberantly bangs on a drum). This has been called affective
attunement by Stern (1985; Stem, Hofer, Haft, and Dore, 1985), who argues
that it is sometimes used deliberately by the mother to enhance or dampen
her child's emotional reactions. Another form of affective induction occurs
in response to the child's specific efforts to obtain emotional cues from
trusted adults. In social referencing, children deliberately look to familiar
adults for information about how to evaluate an ambiguous or uncertain
event, such as when encountering a friendly stranger (Campos and Stenberg, 1981; Feinman, 1982, 1985; Klinnert et al., 1983). The emotional cues
the child receives contribute to accentuating, dampening, redirecting, delaying, or otherwise altering the child's emotional and behavioral reactions
to the event, often by arousing resonant emotion in the child. Social referencing can be observed in infants as young as 7 months of age. In our
own laboratory research we have observed that it is sometimes deliberately
employed by parents to alter the child's initial emotional reactions to uncertain situations. It is similar to how, in adults, emotional responses are

Thompson

284

affected by the reactions of others to ambiguous events (e.g., reacting to
an official's call at a hockey game).
Like the other modes of extrinsic emotional regulation, affective induction often can have complex and unanticipated consequences for young
children, partly because children respond to a caregiver's emotional expressions with diverse emotional responses of their own, as indicated by
the studies reviewed earlier. In a series of naturalistic home observations
and laboratory studies, for example, Cummings and his colleagues (Cummings, 1987; Cummings, Iannotti, and Zahn-Waxler, 1985; Cummings,
Zahn-Waxler, and Radke-Yarrow, 1981, 1984; Zahn-Waxler and Kochanska, 1990) observed that toddlers responded with distress, anger, and anxiety in the presence of adult expressions of anger. In one experimental
study, young children were more likely to act aggressively toward an innocent peer when adults argued in the background, and convergent evidence suggested that this aggression was due to the effects of the adult's
angry expressions on the child's emotional state (Cummings et al., 1985).
A follow-up study revealed that children's reactions depended also on the
degree of marital discord in the child's own family (Cummings, Pellegrini,
Notarius, and Cummings, 1989). This research is important because it suggests how the "emotional climate" of the home can significantly affect the
regulation of a child's emotional experience through processes of affective
induction similar to those described above. It also indicates other consequences for children growing up with parents who have depressive or bipolar disorders.

Control of Opportunity
Direct intervention strategies, selective reinforcement and modeling,
and affective induction are ways parents regulate the emotions of offspring
by influencing the circumstances in which they experience states of heightened emotional arousal. Although young children naturally have many opportunities to experience heightened distress, anger, joy, frustration, and
other emotions, their emotional experience is further regulated by the ecological and caregiving conditions created by parents which significantly influence the frequency, regularity, persistence, and intensity of these
opportunities. These caregiving conditions are constituted in many ways:
they are affected by the socioeconomic circumstances of the family, the
physical ecology of the home, the child-rearing values of the parents, and
overarching cultural values concerning children and emotion, to name a
few. In a sense, therefore, adults control many of the opportunities children
have to experience and learn to cope successfully with heightened emotion.

Emotional Regulation and Development

285

This is an important contributor to the development of individual differences in emotional regulation in the early years of life, before children can
exert significant control over their own settings and experiences.
Cross-cultural studies of early development reveal many examples of
the control of opportunity, that is, parental efforts to regulate emotion in
offspring by regulating the ecological circumstances provoking emotion.
Cultural norms concerning child-rearing practices direct many features of
a young child's early experiences, including disruptive or upsetting childrearing procedures (e.g., early independence-training), regular or prolonged
separations from the parent, the amount of stimulation provided the child
(e.g., through the use of swaddling, cradleboards, etc.), the interpretation
of the child's needs and emotions (e.g., through cultural portrayals of children as innocent or demanding that can influence parental responsiveness),
the interpersonal density of the physical ecology, the use and quality of
extrafamilial caregiving arrangements, and in many other ways. As noted
in Caudilrs classic studies (Caudill and Frost, 1975; Caudill and Weinstein,
1969), for example, the diminished emotional lability and expressiveness of
Japanese infants compared to their American counterparts can be attributed to (1) the more soothing, pacifying style of Japanese mothers, (2) the
small size of the Japanese home that promotes greater mother-infant proximity than in America, (3) the fact that it is culturally normative for Japanese mothers and babies to bathe together, sleep together, and engage in
other physically intimate activities, and (4) the fact that the American custom of babysitting is practiced infrequently in Japan (Miyake, Campos, Kagan, and Bradshaw, 1986; Chen and Miyake, 1986), In these and other
ways, young children develop skills of emotional regulation based on opportunities to experience and cope with states of heightened emotion in
the ecological conditions parents provide.
Regulating emotion by controlling the ecological circumstances provoking emotion is a life-long strategy, but it becomes increasingly self-controlled with maturity. As adolescents and adults exercise greater control over
their ecological settings and the emotional demands they experience within
those settings (e.g., stresses from noisy neighbors or a crowded workplace),
they become capable of better regulating the emotional demands of daily
life. There is evidence that this becomes a very important component in the
self-regulation of emotion in older adults. As Carstensen has argued, older
adults increasingly select settings and relationships that conserve physical
energy, maximize positive affect, and ensure manageable and predictable
socioemotional demands (Carstensen, 1987, in press; Frederickson and Carstensen, 1990). In controlling the opportunities for experiencing heightened
emotional arousal and its management, older adults create ecological settings that are emotionally congenial and supportive for them.

286

Thompson

Summary
Although the rudiments of emotional self-regulatory capabilities are
present in infancy, this period is predominated by the influence of caregivers' extrinsic modes of emotional regulation. The parent's direct intervention strategies, selective reinforcement and modeling, affective induction,
and ecological control of opportunities to experience and regulate heightened emotion have life-long consequences. Caregivers continue to implement these practices in age-appropriate ways to foster the child's emotional
self-control and to increasingly socialize emotion and its expression into
the emotional culture. There remains quite a research agenda concerning
these processes, and especially how they are applied in more discriminating
and emotion-specific ways as children mature. Moreover, given the diversity
of the settings in which infants and children are growing u p - including
day-care and family care homes, preschool and elementary school settings,
and the "framed" settings of television and other media (Dorr, 1985) m
our limited knowledge concerning their emotionally-regulating influences
(and the concordance of these influences with those of parents) defines
another important research challenge.

GROWTH OF INTRINSIC EMOTIONAL REGULATION IN
THE TODDLER AND PRESCHOOL YEARS
In the years following infancy, caregivers remain significant influences
on emotional regulation. But their contributions evolve together with the
child's growing capacities for emotional self-regulation. Many of these
changes are associated with the growth of language skills during the toddler
and preschool years.
Language and the Extrinsic Regulation of Emotion
Language significantly alters how a child's emotional experience can
be managed by caregivers because discourse about emotion becomes possible. Language may be an especially powerful mode for the extrinsic regulation of emotion because of its explicitness, its capacity for past and future
reference (which enables adults to draw upon a history of shared experiences as well as to anticipate future events when conveying messages about
emotion), and its multifaceted quality. As a consequence, children can receive influential verbal messages from adults concerning the circumstances
requiring emotional regulation, the benefits of regulated emotion, the

Emotional Regulation and Development

287

strategies by which emotion may be regulated, the social rules governing
emotional displays, and other information pertinent to emotion and its
management. It is also striking how early these influences can be observed.
Bretherton and her colleagues (Bretherton and Beeghly, 1982; Bretherton
et al., 1981, 1986; Dunn, Bretherton, and Munn, 1987) found that explicit
reference to emotional experiences grew significantly after 18 months of
age and that by the third year children made relatively frequent reference
to internal states associated with emotion.
There are several ways this kind of verbal interaction can influence
emotional regulation. First, parents can actively direct regulatory processes
through verbal instruction, which can include exhortation ("Will you please
calm down!"), threats ("You'll go to your room if you don't stop crying!"),
and warnings of the consequences of unregulated emotion ("You'll get hiccups if you keep laughing so hard"). These messages not only have an immediate impact but also shape the child's understanding of emotion;
children become keenly aware of the reasons for parents' efforts to direct
the regulation of emotion and its expression in certain situations (Saami,
1990). Second, parent-child discourse can also regulate emotion through
the adult's management of information to the child, such as when children
must face an uncomfortable or stressful experience that is explained and
interpreted by the parent (e.g., a hospital procedure) (Miller and Green,
1985). Third, parents can use language to suggest explicit emotional regulatory strategies to the child, such as the value of distracting mental imagery, comforting self-talk, redirecting thoughts, using external distractors,
re-defining goals and outcomes, and similar procedures. Fourth, discourse
about emotion is also important as children overhear parents talk about
their own emotional experiences. There is evidence that children learn
about emotion and its management indirectly from these conversations (cf.
Miller and Sperry, 1987). It is worth noting that discourse about emotion
also assumes an important role in the understanding of emotional experience and its regulation in peer relationships at somewhat older ages (cf.
Gottman and Mettetal, 1986).

Emotional Understanding and Emotional Self-Regulation
Language is important not only as a means of discourse about emotion with caregivers, however. In addition to its powerful role as an extrinsic
regulator of emotion, language is important also as it shapes a child's own
symbolic representations of emotion and emotional experiences. Indeed,
language is developmentally significant in emotional self-regulation because
the effects of parent-child discourse about emotion begin at a time when

288

Thompson

children are themselves acquiring a conceptual network of emotion terms,
concepts, and ideas, in short, a social-cognitive understanding of emotion.
Language thus enhances the child's reflective consciousness of emotion,
and this makes emotive processes themselves the subject of reflection and
analysis. In its most specific applications, language becomes an early mode
of direct emotional self-regulation, such as in the self-coaching of young
children in emotionally demanding situations (exemplified by the toddler
who is overheard saying during a brief separation, "Mommy will come back.
She said she would come back"; Smolek and Weinraub, 1979).
More broadly, however, the growth of representational skills related
to emotion provides the basis for the earliest cognized strategies of emotional regulation, which are part of the child's meta-emotive understanding,
or knowledge of emotional processes (Thompson, 1990). Once children begin to acquire knowledge of emotion and its constituents, in other words,
their capacity to identify and implement strategies of emotional regulation
begins to emerge. One reason is that an understanding of emotion sensitizes children to the various targets of regulatory influence (e.g., one's sensory experience in emotionally-arousing circumstances, the reactions of
others to one's emotional displays, the nature of the conditions that arouse
emotion, internal psychological processes related to emotion, etc.). Moreover, emotional understanding also enables children to reflect on the origins and consequences of emotional arousal and its expression, and this
can motivate and direct self-regulatory efforts. Thus, the growth of emotional understanding and knowledge of the regulation of emotion develop
in tandem, and their origins are in the child's earliest conceptual representations of emotion during the preschool years.
According to Meerun Terwogt and Olthof (1989), there are several
components to children's metaemotive understanding that assist them in
their emotional regulatory efforts. First, there is the child's understanding
of the antecedents of emotion, or the associations between specific situations and the emotional reactions they provoke. This kind of knowledge
emerges very early: before 3 1/2 years of age, children can accurately identify situations that elicit simple emotional reactions like happiness, sadness,
anger, and fear (Borke, 1971; Harter, 1982a; Mood, Johnson, and Shantz,
1978; Trabasso, Stein, and Johnson, 1981; see also Barden, Zelko, Duncan,
and Masters, 1980; Harris, Olthof, Meerum Terwogt, and Hardman, 1987).
The emotional lexicon expands significantly in the years that follow (Harter,
1982a, Ridgeway, Waters, and Kuczaj, 1985; Russell and Ridgeway, 1983;
Schwartz and Trabasso, 1984), and children can increasingly discriminate
between the different causal antecedents of emotion (e.g., Graham and
Weiner, 1986; Thompson, 1987, 1989; Weiner and Graham, 1984), including distinguishing between psychological and situational determinants of

Emotional Regulation and Development

289

emotion (e.g., CJnepp and Chilamkurti, 1988; Gnepp and Gould, 1985; Harris, 1983; Stein and Trabasso, 1989).
Thus, early emotional concepts are behaviorally-based, simple, and
limited in depth and scope. As children increasingly acquire broader, more
sophisticated, psychologically-based emotion concepts, their knowledge of
the diverse origins and regulatory influences of emotion expands. For example, an early understanding of pride that is based primarily on positive
outcomes develops into a more mature conception that depends on positive
outcomes that are based on one's own deliberate efforts (Stipek, 1983;
Thompson, 1987, 1989). Similarly, children begin to understand that guilt
is warranted not just when bad things happen, but when one is responsible
for them (Thompson, 1987, 1989).
A second component of meta-emotive understanding is knowing the
consequences of an emotional response. There are two aspects of this understanding. The first concerns knowing the consequences of an emotional
display, which is related to how children understand the sociocultural rules
governing emotional expressions. As Saarni (1979, 1989, 1990) has shown,
children in the early grade-school years become aware that emotional displays should be regulated to avoid hurting another's feelings or being personally embarrassed, and to get attention, elicit sympathy, or obtain help
from others. There is additional evidence that even children as young as
age 4 can use emotional display rules appropriately, even when they cannot verbalize their strategy or reasons for using them (Cole, 1986). Thus,
one reason for emotional regulation is because children know the consequences of unregulated emotional displays (see Fuchs and Thelen, 1988).
Children and adults seek to regulate emotional arousal in order to manage
its expression.
But children and adults also strive to regulate emotion independently
of its social consequences. Unpleasant emotional states are managed because of their subjective discomfort; emotions like anger, fear, or frustration are regulated, at times, because they can undermine effective
functioning. Thus, knowing the consequences of an emotional response
includes knowing the consequences of emotional arousal. We know relatively little about how this aspect of meta-emotive understanding develops.
In one study, children from the age of 6 (the earliest age studied) were
aware that they perceived others more positively when they were in a positive mood, and that negative emotion impaired task performance (Harris,
Olthof, and Meerum Terwogt, 1981). From the late preschool years, children are also aware that happiness instills generosity, anger diminishes
self-control, and sadness as well as anger dampens self-gratification (Masters and Carlson, 1984). But this aspect of children's meta-emotive knowl-

Thompson

290

edge deserves further study, primarily because of its significance for managing emotional experience.
A third component of meta-emotive understanding is children's knowledge of the strategies of emotional self-regulation. There has been considerable research on children's awareness of these strategies, although it relies
largely on self-report and, in light of Cole's (1986) provocative findings reviewed earlier, it is important to enlist nonverbal performance measures in
future studies with young children. Even so, current findings indicate that
during the preschool years, children rely largely on a few very simple approaches to managing their own emotional experience. Preschoolers can alter their emotional experience by regulating sensory intake (e.g., covering
the eyes or ears) (Bretherton et al., 1981). Sometimes they simply ignore an
emotionally-arousing stimulus, even when it is personally threatening, or
leave the situation, or otherwise restrict information-intake (Cummings,
1987). Preschoolers also attempt to manage their emotional arousal by seeking nurturance from trusted adults (Masters, Ford, and Arend, 1983; McCoy
and Masters, 1985), or by using encouraging or reassuring self-talk (Smolek
and Weinraub, 1979). At times, of course, they simply remove or avoid emotionally arousing situations. There is also some evidence that preschoolers
can manage emotional arousal by altering or substituting goals for the situation (e.g., playing by oneself instead of a frustrating peer), but this is a
limited capability at young ages (Stein and Levine, 1989; Stein and Trabasso,
1989). Finally, there is limited evidence that preschoolers understand that
the intensity of an emotion wanes over time (and thus that "time heals all
ills"), especially if emotionally arousing circumstances change. But they appreciate also that emotion can have long-term effects depending, in part,
on the intensity of the initial experience of emotional arousal (Harris, 1983;
Harris, Guz, Lipian, and Man-Shu, 1985).
Taken together, these developmental achievements in how young children understand the strategies for emotional self-regulation are consistent
with their evolving understanding of emotion itself. Emotion is perceived
as something that exists primarily in situations and in behavior; regulatory
efforts that change situations, reduce their influence (e.g., by restricting
sensory- and information-intake), or alter one's behavior in those situations
are the regulatory avenues of first resort to the preschooler.
STRATEGIC EMOTIONAL SELF-REGULATION IN
MIDDLE CHILDHOOD

During the grade-school years, children's understanding of emotion
evolves to encompass the psychological, attributional, and motivational

Emotional Regulation and Development

291

complexities of emotional experience (Harris and Olthof, 1982). This
should be unsurprising in view of several other developmental achievements
during these years. Children are acquiring psychologically-oriented conceptions of self and other that provide a basis for a more sophisticated representation of emotional experience (Damon and Hart, 1982; Shantz, 1983).
Cognitive achievements in the appearance/reality distinction (Flavell, Flavell, and Green, 1983), representational flexibility in applying multiple perspectives to a single event (Fischer, 1980; Fischer, Shaver, and Carnochan,
1989), and growth in social knowledge and role-taking skills have important
implications for children's understanding of (1) emotional display rules, (2)
the multiple dimensions of emotional experience and the simultaneity of
different emotions, and (3) the consequences of one's emotional expressions for social partners. For example, they understand better the causal
implications of different emotional experiences (e.g., that pride reflects success owing to one's efforts, sympathy for another derives from their lack
of success owing to inability etc.) (Graham, 1991). Added to these influences is the catalyst of peer interactions, which become increasingly oriented toward psychological compatibility and emotional intimacy during
middle childhood (Selman, 1980). As a consequence, children acquire and
enlist a broad variety of emotional self-regulatory strategies for managing
immediate emotional reactions to emotionally salient peer encounters, especially those that place the child at heightened risk for being exposed or
embarrassed (Gottman and Mettetal, 1986). In peer encounters as well as
in other social situations, the skills of emotional self-regulation are enlisted
for strategic personal and social ends.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the repertoire of strategies for emotional
self-regulation expands significantly in size and complexity during middle
childhood. During this period, for example, children understand that emotional experience can be altered by internal emotional re-direction (e.g.,
thinking happy thoughts in a sad situation) (Altshuler and Ruble, 1989;
Band and Weisz, 1988; Carroll and Steward, 1984; Harris et al., 1981), or
by redirecting attention or deliberate distraction (Altshuler and Ruble,
1989; Band and Weisz, 1988; Harris and Lipian, 1989). In a related vein,
Mischel's research has shown that children at this time can manage emotional arousal in incentive conditions through emotion-blunting ideation or
by focusing on the benefits of regulation (or the costs of unregulation;
Mischel and Mischel, 1977, 1983). Emotional experience can also be altered
by reinterpreting or re-defining the situation to dampen or enhance arousal
(e.g., thinking "it's just a story" when listening to a sad account) (Meerum
Terwogt, Schene, and Harris, 1986). At times, grade-school children alter
emotion by acting in a way that provokes a different emotion (e.g., playing
with toys when feeling anxious) (Altshuler and Ruble, 1989; Harris and

292

Thompson

Lipian, 1989: Harris et al., 1981). In middle childhood, children are also
aware that emotional expressions to others can be dissociated from internal
emotional experience and, by implication, one can manage emotion by altering the reactions of others to oneself (e.g., appearing brave before a
threatening bully) (Harris, Donnelly, Guz, and Pitt-Watson, 1986; Gross
and Harris, 1988; Harris and Gross, 1989; Harris and Lipian, 1989; Harris
et al., 1981; Saarni, 1979, 1984; Selman, 1981; Taylor and Harris, 1984).
Other aspects of emotional understanding that emerge during middle
childhood are also relevant to emotional self-regulation. During this time,
for example, children become aware that different emotions can be experienced either sequentially or simultaneously, and that when emotions are
differently valenced they can sometimes produce ambivalence or emotional
conflict (Carroll and Steward, 1984; Donaldson and Westerman, 1986; Harris, 1983; Harris and Lipian, 1989; Harter, 1982a,b; Harter and Buddin,
1987; Meerum Terwogt, Koops, Oosterhoff, and Olthof, 1986a). They are
aware of some of the causal ascriptions underlying emotional arousal, and
know that changing attributions of causality can have different emotional
consequences (e.g., "You shouldn't be mad at your little brother - - he didn't mean it!") (Graham and Weiner, 1986; Thompson, 1987, 1989; Weiner
and Graham, 1984). Finally, they understand that emotion can be re-evoked
if one recalls memories of an earlier emotional experience, whether positive
or negative in valence (Harris et al., 1985).
Taken together, this burgeoning repertoire of strategies reflects the
grade-schooler's appreciation of the multifaceted features of emotional experience that entail manipulable psychological, attributional, and social inferential processes. In a sense, these achievements reflect the growth of
emotional autonomy as well as the management of emotional experience
because children depend less on the situational instigators and external regulators of emotion, and they can maintain satisfying emotional well-being
more independently and self-directedly (Cole and Kaslow, 1988).
As earlier noted, however, most of these studies rely on children's verbal self-report in response to hypothetical story scenarios involving emotional regulation. We know disappointingly little about how these regulatory
strategies are actually implemented in real situations. The results of one
study suggest that when actual emotional arousal is intense, the capacity of
children to devise and apply emotional self-regulatory strategies may be
more limited. Harris and Lipian (1989) interviewed 10-year-olds who were
hospitalized for a variety of acute conditions, and they discovered that their
evocation of strategies for emotional management was impoverished compared with that of nonhospitalized children of the same age. Harris and
Lipian concluded that the negative emotions associated with hospitalization
"flooded" children's perceptions of their conditions, blunting their capacity

Emotional Regulation and Development

293

to regulate their own affect and accounting for the deficits observed in children's reports of emotional regulatory strategies. However, hospitalized children may also have had a more realistic sense of the limited range of
self-regulatory strategies that were likely to prove effective in their circumstances. This is a finding, therefore, that deserves further exploration beginning with a series of investigations of self-regulatory processes in actual
emotionally arousing situations.
On the whole, however, these striking advances in meta-emotive understanding provide an important foundation for the systems of emotion
k n o w l e d g e - or emotion p r o t o t y p e s - by which mature conceptions of
emotion seem to be organized (Fischer et al., 1989: Shaver, Schwartz, Kirson, and O'Connor, 1987). Indeed, many significant components of emotion
p r o t o t y p e s - concerning the antecedents of emotion, the consequences of
an emotional response and its display, and the strategies of emotional selfregulation - - are initially constituted in the earliest forms of meta-emotive
understanding in the preschool years, and are significantly deepened and
elaborated as a consequence of the developmental achievements of middle
childhood.

A THEORY OF PERSONAL EMOTION IN ADOLESCENCE
Along with the growth of psychologically-oriented conceptions of emotion and emotional regulation, middle childhood also witnesses the growth
of self-understanding that provides children with insight into their own emotive processes, distinct from those of others. Early in the grade-school years,
if not during the preschool period, children become aware that their own
emotional experiences are different from those of others in important ways.
A child may discover that he does not enjoy roller-coaster rides or scary
movies as much as his friends do, or that it takes her longer to feel comfortable with unfamiliar people than it does others, but that there are things
she can do to facilitate this process. In other words, while they are acquiring
general knowledge about emotive processes, children are also learning about
emotive processes that are more idiosyncratic to themselves. This constitutes
the basis for a theory of personal emotion: an understanding of how emotion
functions and is managed within oneself.
It is easy to see why the rudiments of a theory of personal emotion
would emerge early in life, and why children would be motivated to enlarge
this form of self-understanding. Emotional experiences are salient and significant catalysts for social functioning and behavioral self-management,
and thus a capacity to understand and predict how one will react emotionally to commonly-occurring situations would enable children to act more

294

Thompson

competently and confidently. In addition, an appreciation of the emotional
self-regulatory strategies that are particularly effective in one's own exper i e n c e - whether they entail the use of mental imagery or listening to favorite music m would further enable children to enlist their emotions in
more productive and useful ways in their ongoing interactions with the social and nonsocial world. For these reasons, it is unsurprising that one can
find clues to the early emergence of rudiments of such a theory in some
of the studies cited above. For example, in his study of behaviorally inhibited children, Kagan and his colleagues (1987) quote one of their children
who said to his mother at age 5 1/2: "I know I am afraid, but I'm trying
not to be."
For the same reasons, however, it is clear that a theory of personal
emotion achieves significant coherence and consistency primarily during
adolescence. It is during the teenage years that individuals are constructing
a network of self-referent beliefs that are psychologically more complex,
differentiated, and integrated than those that existed in earlier years. It
thus seems likely that during this period, the theory of personal emotion
is shaped by other elements of the self-system and provides an important
contribution to emerging self-understanding. Moreover, as this "theory" becomes progressively refined during the adolescent and young adult years,
it becomes part of the network of self-schemas (Markus, 1977) that organize self-understanding in maturity. As a consequence, emotional self-understanding is a contributor to and is shaped by other aspects of
self-awareness that become consolidated during adolescence.

EMOTIONAL SELF-REGULATION IN THE ADULT YEARS
The developmental research literature has little to say about further
growth in emotional self-regulation in maturity. Indeed, prevailing debates
over whether the general quality of emotional experience changes (especially in later l i f e ) - and if so, what are its c a u s e s - remain essentially
unresolved (cf. Malatesta, 1981). However, it is possible to identify (albeit
speculatively) several general themes to the self-regulation of emotion during the adult years.
First, it is likely that emotional experience becomes regulated in increasingly idiosyncratic ways, depending on (1) the individual's goals for
regulating emotion, (2) the "theory of personal emotion" by which selfregulatory efforts are organized, and (3) the demands of the social setting
(Labouvie-Vief, Hakim-Larson, DeVoe, and Schoeberlein, 1989). Indeed,
Labouvie-Vief and colleagues (1989) have proposed that with increasing

Emotional Regulation and Development

295

maturity, individuals are less constrained by the conventional demands of
the emotion culture and increasingly regulate emotional experience according to personal goals and a recognition of the need to maintain a vibrant,
unique subjective emotional experience. It seems likely that a history of
experiences of emotional self-regulation culminates by the adult years in
the development of an effective repertoire of strategies that are enlisted
in creating a more unique, personalized emotional life.
Second, it is likely that emotional self-regulation becomes increasingly
organized in emotion-specific ways. As the demands of emotional experience and the dictates of the emotional culture increasingly focus on discrete
emotions in older individuals, self-regulatory strategies are likely to become
more emotion-specific. Thus it is likely that mature individuals develop differentiated regulatory strategies for the management of anger, anxiety,
guilt, and other emotions, using distracting ideation for some emotions,
intellectualization for others, and avoiding emotionally-arousing circumstances for still other emotions.
Third, and finally, it is likely that with increasing age, emotional selfregulation is based not only on differentiated strategies of self-regulation,
but also on regulating the emotional demands of the environment, both
interpersonal and inanimate. As Carstensen's (1987, in press; Frederickson
and Carstensen, 1990) research reviewed earlier seems to indicate, in later
life, adults exercise greater selectivity in their social relationships, choosing
those that ensure predictable and manageable emotional demands and
that heighten positive affect. Indeed, one of the themes of later-life developmental theories is the selectivity older adults exercise in their interpersonal and ecological settings to construct congenial and manageable
life experiences. Thus, insofar as they are capable of exercising such control over their environments, older adults are likely to regulate their emotional experiences by regulating the interpersonal density, noise, privacy
intrusions, and other demands of their settings, and the emotional, consequences of these demands. And whereas younger children try to regulate
emotion by restricting information intake, older adults can manage emotional arousal by restructuring their schedules (e.g., clearing the schedule
for a midafternoon "time out") escaping from the situation (e.g., by a
spontaneous or planned vacation), or retiring to a private place. This reflects that the maintenance of satisfying emotional well-being in the adult
years is fostered both by an elaborate repertoire of emotional self-regulatory strategies and by the ability to regulate the extrinsic demands on
one's emotional life, in the context of striving to create a more personalized, unique quality of subjective experience.

Thompson

296

CONCLUSION
The study of emotional regulation poses fascinating and significant
challenges to the educational psychologist because of the multidimensional
quality of emotional experience and the numerous catalysts to the growth
of extrinsic and self-regulatory processes throughout the life-span. This research review is both a conceptual outline and an empirical challenge: it
is not hard to find important domains of underresearched topics described
above as well as suggestions for further inquiry. In many respects, the significance of emotional regulatory processes for subjective well-being at various phases of life underscores the importance of future research.
This is especially true during the school years, in educational as well
as in extracurricular contexts. Although establishing applications from this
research to how parents and teachers can facilitate children's learning,
achievement, and competence in school is a bit premature, some speculative implications can be identified. For example, Mischel's research
(Mischel and Mischel, 1977, 1983) strongly suggests that children during
this period can enlist emotional self-regulatory strategies offered by an
adult that will improve their performance in tasks involving delayed rewards
and the inhibition of initial response tendencies. These are skills that assume an important role in certain kinds of problem-solving tasks. Emotional self-regulation in these contexts is fostered by deliberate strategies
involving distracting ideation or, alternatively, focusing on the rewards of
delay or inhibition. These can be fostered by direct instruction (coaching),
modeling, or in other ways.
In other situations, learning can be encouraged by equipping children
with emotional self-regulatory strategies that enable them to cope better
with the frustrations of initial task failures or performance anxiety (e.g.,
through self-coaching, re-directing attributions, or reinterpreting the failure) and which promote continued interest in the task. Indeed, such strategies may have the added benefit of fostering the child's intrinsic
motivation related to task performance, which is an important contributor
to academic success (Lepper, 1988). More broadly, students' perceptions
of their own competence in academic and non-academic situations involves, among other things, the capacity to attend to appropriate indications of t h e i r skills in the context of p e r f o r m a n c e evaluations,
social-comparison information, and other criteria, and to manage the emotions engendered by their success and failure experiences. Developmental
changes in children's perceptions of competence are related to changes
in their attention to relevant criteria of their skills (especially at earlier
ages) and changes in their management of achievement-related emotions,

Emotional Regulation and Development

297

which may be especially significant during the junior-high years (cf. Connell, 1985; Harter, 1982c; Harter and Pike, 1984). This is a topic of developmental study meriting further research.
In addition to fostering students' emotional self-regulatory efforts
in achievement situations, parents and teachers may also strive to enhance learning and achievement by extrinsic modes of emotional regulation. Attributional theory and derivative research indicate that the
emotional dimensions of performance feedback alter children's perceptions of the causes of their success or failure experiences. These perc e p t i o n s affect, in turn, f u t u r e efforts to succeed. F o r example,
performance evaluations accompanied by emotions like sympathy imply
that failure is due to inability, but emotions like anger suggest that failure is due to lack of effort, with the implication that one can succeed
in the future by trying harder (e.g., Graham, 1991). Teachers and parents may directly influence a child's achievement motivation, therefore,
through the emotional responses they provide to the child's successes
and failures. Reacting to a student's failure with annoyance rather than
pity implies that the child is capable of performing well contingent on
added effort and is consistent with encouragement to the child to try
harder.
Furthermore, the child's causal ascriptions for success and failure
can also be altered by influencing the child's o w n emotional responses
to these experiences. Encouraging feelings of pride in academic success,
for example, fosters the child's perception that she is responsible for her
success, whereas children who feel grateful or surprised for their success
are less likely to experience the same sense of personal responsibility for
doing well. Similarly, encouraging children to feel guilty (or, perhaps, angry at themselves) for academic failure implies that the causes of failure
are remediable and controllable, which is not true of failure-based reactions like hopelessness or resignation. In short, the causal interpretations
of success and failure experiences in academic situations are profoundly
affected by emotional reactions to these experiences, both by authorities
and by oneself. These can be a significant target of extrinsic strategies
of emotional regulation that can affect students' striving for success in
future tasks.
The study of emotional regulation thus has potentially valuable applications to educational concerns as well as to other situations that affect
personal well-being. Elucidating these applications, as well as the developmental pathways leading to the skills of emotional self-regulation, becomes
an important task for theory and research.

298

Thompson

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is very grateful for the helpful comments of Alice Ganzel
and Heidi Pisaruk on an earlier version of this manuscript, as well as the
suggestions of the editor and two anonymous reviewers for this journal.
This paper is an extension of an earlier analysis of emotional regulation
presented in Thompson (1990).

REFERENCES
Aber, J. L., and Cicchetti, D. (1984). The socio-emotional development of maltreated children:
An empirical and theoretical analysis. In Fitzgerald, H. R., Lester, B. M., and Yogman,
M. W. (eds.), Theory and Research in Behavioral Pediatrics (Vol. 2), Plenum, New York,
pp. 147-205.
Achenbach, T. M. and Edelbrock, C. (1983). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist, Queen
City Printers, Burlington, Vermont.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., and Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of Attachment,
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Altshuler, J. L., and Ruble, D. N. (1989). Developmental changes in children's awareness of
strategies for coping with uncontrollable stress. Child Dev. 60: 1337-1349.
Band, E., and Weisz, J. R. (1988). How to feel better when it feels bad: Children's perspectives
on coping with everyday stress. Dev. Psychol. 24: 247-253.
Barden, R. C., Zelko, F. A., Duncan, S. W., and Masters, J. C. (1980). Children's consensual
knowledge about the experiential determinants of emotion. J. Person. Soc. Psychol. 39:
968-976.
Barrett, K. C., and Campos, J. J. (1987). Perspectives on emotional development II: A
functionalist approach to emotions. In J. D. Osofsky (ed.), Handbook of Infant
Development (2nd Ed.), Wiley, New York, pp. 555-578.
Bates, J. E. (1987). Temperament in infancy. In J.D. Osofsky (ed.), Handbook of Infant
Development (2nd Ed.), Wiley, New York, pp. 1101-1149.
Borke, H. (1971). Interpersonal perception of young children: Egocentrism or empathy? Dev.
Psychol. 5: 263-269.
Brazelton, T. B., Koslowski, B., and Main, M. (1974). The origins of reciprocity: The early
mother-infant interaction. In Lewis, M., and Rosenblum, L. (eds.). The Effects of the
Infant on Its Caregiver, Wiley, New York, pp. 49-76.
Bretherton, I., and Beeghly, M. (1982). Talking about internal states: The acquisition of an
explicit theory of mind. Dev. Psychol. 18: 906-921.
Bretherton, I., McNew, S., and Beeghly-Smith, M. (1981). Early person knowledge as
expressed in gestural and verbal communication: When do infants acquire a "theory of
mind"? In Lamb, M.E., and Sherrod, L.R. (eds.), Infant Social Cognition, Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 333-373.
Bretherton, I., Fritz, J., Zahn-Waxler, C., and Ridgeway, D. (1986). Learning to talk about
emotions: A functionalist perspective. Child Dev. 57: 529-548.
Brooks-Gunn, J., and Lewis, M. (1982). Affective exchanges between normal and handicapped
infants and their mothers. In Field, T., and Fogel, A. (eds.), Emotion and Early Interaction,
Edbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 161-188.
Burgess, R. L., and Conger, R. D. (1978). Family interaction in abusive, neglectful, and normal
families. Child Dev. 49: 1163-1173.
Buss, A. H., and Plomin, R. (1984). Temperament: Early Developing Personality Traits, Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, New Jersey.

Emotional Regulation and Development

299

Campos, J. J., and Stenberg, C. C. (1981). Perception, appraisal and emotion: The onset of
social referencing. In Lamb, M.E., and Sherrod, L.R. (eds.), Infant Social Cognition,
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 273-314.
Campos, J. J., Barrett, K. C., Lamb, M. E., Goldsmith, H. H., and Stenberg, C. (1983).
Socioemotional development. In Mussen, P.H. (ed.); Haith, M. M., and Campos, J.J.
(Vol. eds.). Handbook of Child Psychology (Vol. II): Infancy and Developmental
Psychobiology, Wiley, New York, pp. 783-915.
Campos, J. J., Campos, R. G., and Barrett, K. C. (1989). Emergent themes in the study of
emotional development and emotional regulation. Dev. PsychoL 25: 394-402.
Campos, R. G. (1989). Soothing pain-elicited distress in infants with swaddling and pacifiers.
Child Dev. 60: 781-782.
Carroll, J. J., and Steward, M. S. (1984). The role of cognitive development in children's
understandings of their own feelings. Child Dev. 55: 1486-1492.
Carstensen, L. L. (1987). Age-related changes in social aGtivity. In Carstensen, L. L., and
Edelstein, B. A. (eds.), Handbook of Clinical Gerontology, Pergamon, New York, pp.
222-237.
Carstensen, L. L. (in press). Selectivity theory: Social activity in life-span context. In Schaie,
K.W. (ed.). Annual Review of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Springer, New York.
Caudill, W., and Frost, L. (1975). A comparison of maternal care and infant behavior in
Japanese-American, American, and Japanese families. In Bronfenbrenner, U., and
Mahoney, M. A. (eds.), Influences on Human Development (2nd ed.), Dryden, Hinsdale,
Illinois, pp. 329-342.
Caudill, W., and Weinstein, H. (1969). Maternal care and infant behavior in Japan and
America. Psychiatry 32: 12-43.
Chen, S.-J., and Miyake, K. (1986). Japanese studies of infant development. In Stevenson,
H., Azuma, H., and Hakuta, K. (eds.), Child Development and Education in Japan,
Freeman, New York, pp. 135-146.
Cicchetti, D. (1990). The organization and coherence of socioemotional, cognitive, and
representational development: Illustrations through a developmental psychopathology
perspective on Down syndrome and child maltreatment. In Thompson, R. A. (ed.),
Socioemotional Development. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 36), University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, pp. 259-366.
Cole, P. M. (1986). Children's spontaneous control of facial expression. Child Dev. 57:
1309-1321.
Cole, P. M., and Kaslow, N. J. (1988). Interactional and cognitive strategies for affect
regulation: Developmental perspective on childhood depression. In Alloy, L. (ed.),
Cognitive Processes in Depression, Guilford, New York, pp. 310-341.
Connell, J. P. (1985). A new multidimensional measure of children's perceptions of control.
Child Dev. 56: 1018-1041.
Cummings, E. M. (1987). Coping with background anger in early childhood. Child Dev. 58:
976-984.
Cummings, E. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., and Radke-Yarrow, M. (1981). Young children's
responses to expressions of anger and affection by others in the family. Child Dev. 52:
1274-1282.
Cummings, E. M., Zahn-Waxler, C., and Radke-Yarrow, M. (1984). Developmental changes
in children's reactions to anger in the home. J. Child Psychol. Psychiat. 25: 63-74.
Cummings, E. M., Iannotti, R. J., and Zahn-Waxler, C. (1985). Influence of conflict between
adults on the emotions and aggression of young children. Dev. PsychoL 21: 495-507.
Cummings, J. S., Pellegrini, D. S., Notarius, C. I., and Cummings, E. M. (1989). Children's
responses to angry adult behavior as a function of marital distress and history of
interparent hostility. Child Dev. 60: 1035-1043.
Damon, W., and Hart, D. (1982). The development of self-understanding from infancy through
adolescence. Child Dev. 60: 841-864.
Davidson, R. J., and Fox, N. A. (1982). Asymmetrical brain activity discriminates between
positive and negative affective stimuli in human infants. Science 218: 1235-1237.

300

Thompson

Dawson, G., and Panagiotides, H. (in press). The role of frontal lobe functioning in the
development of infant self-regulatory behavior. Brain Cognition.
Derryberry, D., and Rothbart, M. K. (1984). Emotion, attention, and temperament. In Izard,
C. E., Kagan, J., and Zajonc, R. B. (eds.), Emotions, Cognition and Behavior, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 132-166.
Diamond, A. (1988a). Abilities and neural mechanisms underlying AB performance. Child
Dev. 59: 523-527.
Diamond, A. (1988b). Differences between adult and infant cognition: Is the crucial variable
presence or absence of language? In Weiskrantz, L. (ed.), Thought Without Language,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 337-370.
Dickstein, S., Thompson, R. A., Estes, D., Malkin, C., and Lamb, M. E. (1984). Social
referencing and the security of attachment, lnfant Behav. Dev. 7: 507-516.
Dienstbier, R. A. (1989). Arousal and physiological toughness: Implications for mental and
physical health. Psychol. Rev. 96: 84-100.
Dodge, K. A. (1991). Emotion and social information processing. In Garber, J., and Dodge,
K. (eds.), The Development of Emotion Regulation and Dysregulation, Cambridge, New
York, pp. 159-181.
Dodge, K. A., Pettit, G. S., McClaskey, C. L., and Brown, M. M. (1986). Social competence
in children. Monographs Soc Res. Child Dev. 51 (Serial no. 213).
Donaldson, S. K., and Westerman, M. A. (1986), Development of children's understanding
of ambivalence and causal theories of emotions. Dev. Psychol. 22: 655-662.
Dorr, A. (1985). Contexts for experience with emotion, with special attention to television.
In Lewis, M., and Saarni, C. (eds.), The Socialization of Emotion, Plenum, New York,
pp. 55-85.
Dunn, J., Bretherton, I., and Munn, P. (1987). Conversations about feeling states between
mothers and their young children. Dev. Psychol. 23: 132-139.
Emde, R. N., Gaensbauer, T. J., and Harmon, R. J. (1976). Emotional expression in infancy:
A biobehavioral study. Psychol. Issues 10 (Monograph 37).
Fagan, J. W., Ohr, P. S., Fleckenstein, L. K., and Ribner, O. R. (1985). The effect of crying
on long-term memory in infancy. Child Dev. 56: 1584-1592.
Feinman, S. (1982). Social referencing in infancy. Merrill-Palmer Q. 28: 445-470.
Feinman, S. (1985). Emotional expression, social referencing, and preparedness for learning
in i n f a n c y - Mother knows best, but sometimes I know better. In Zivin, G. (ed.). The
Development of Expressive Behavior, Academic, Orlando, Florida, pp. 291-318.
Field, T. (1985). Infant arousal, attention and affect during early interactions. In Lipsitt, L.
P. (ed.), Advances in Infancy Research (Vol. 1), Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey, pp. 57-100.
Fischer, K. W. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: The control and construction of
hierarchies of skills. Psychol. Rev. 87: 477-531.
Fischer, K. W., Shaver, P., and Carnochan, P. (1989). A skill approach to emotional
development: From basic- to subordinate-category emotions. In Damon, W. (ed.), Child
Development Today and Tomorrow (New Directions for Child Development Series, no.
40), Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, pp. 107-136.
Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., and Green, F. L. (1983). Development of the appearance-reality
distinction. Cognitive Psychol. 15: 96-120.
Fogel, A. (1982). Affect dynamics in early infancy: Affective tolerance. In Field, T., and Fogel,
A. (eds.), Emotion and Early Interaction, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 25-56.
Fox, N. A. (1989a). Psychophysiological correlates of emotional reactivity during the first year
of life. Dev. Psychol. 25: 364-372.
Fox, N. A. (1989b). Heart rate variability and self-regulation: Individual differences in
autonomic patterning and their relation to infant and child temperament. In Reznick, S.,
and Kagan, J. (eds.), Perspectives on Behavioral Inhibition, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, pp. 177-195.
Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1984). Hemispheric substrates of affect: A developmental
model. In Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (eds.), The Psychobiology of Affective
Development, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 353-381.

Emotional Regulation and Development

301

Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1987). Electroencephalogram asymmetry in response to the
approach of a stranger and maternal separation in 10-month-old infants. Dev. Psychol.
23: 233-240.
Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1988). Patterns of brain electrical activity during facial signs
of emotion in 10-month-old infants. Dev. PsychoL 24: 230-236.
Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (1991). Hemispheric specialization and separation protest
behavior: Developmental processes and individual differences. In Gewirtz, J. L., and
Kurtines, W. (eds.), Intersection Points in Attachment Research, Plenum, New York, pp.
147-164.
Frederickson, B. L., and Carstensen, L. L. (1990). Choosing social partners: How old age and
anticipated endings make people more selective. PsychoL Aging 5: 335-347.
Frodi, A. M., and Lamb, M. E. (1980). Child abusers' responses to infant smiles and cries.
Child Dev. 51: 238-241.
Fuchs, D., and Thelen, M. H. (1988). Children's expected interpersonal consequences of
communicating their affective state and reported likelihood of expression. Child Dev. 59:
1314-1322.
Gaensbauer, T. J. (1982). Regulation of emotional expression in infants from two contrasting
caretaking environments. J. Am. Acad. Child Psychiat. 21: 163-171.
Gaensbauer, T. J., and Mrazek, D. (1981). Differences in the patterning of affective expression
in infants. Z Am. Acad. Child Psychiat. 20: 673-691.
Gaensbauer, T. J., and Sands, K. (1979). Distorted affective communications in
abused/neglected infants and their potential impact on caretakers. Z Am. Acad. Child
Psychiat. 18: 236-250.
Gekoski, M. J., Rovee-Collier, C. K., and Carulli-Rabinowitz, V. (1983). A longitudinal
analysis of inhibition of infant distress: The origins of social expectations? Infant Behav
Dev. 6: 339-351.
Gianino, A., and Tronick, E. (1988). The Mutual Regulation Model: The infant's self and
interactive regulation and coping and defensive capacities. In Field, T., McCabe, P., and
Schneiderman, N. (eds.) Stress and Coping (Vol. 2), Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp.
47-68.
Gnepp, J., and Chilamkurti, C. (1988). Children's use of personality attributions to predict
other people's emotional and behavioral reactions. Child Dev. 59: 743-754.
Gnepp, J., and Gould, M. E. (1985). The development of personalized inferences:
Understanding other people's emotional reactions in light of their prior experiences. Child
Dev. 56: 1455-1464.
Goldsmith, H. H., Buss, A. H., Plomin, R., Rothbart, M. K., Thomas, A., Chess, S., Hinde,
R. A., and McCall, R. B. (1987). Roundtable: What is temperament? Four approaches.
Child Dev. 58: 505-529.
Gordon, S. L. (1989). The socialization of children's emotions: Emotional culture, competence,
and exposure. In Saarni, C., and Harris, P. (eds.), Children's Understanding of Emotion,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 319-349.
Gottman, J., and Mettetal, G. (1986). Speculations about social and affective development:
Friendship and acquaintanceship through adolescence. In Gottman, J. M., and Parker,
J.G. (eds.), Conversations of Friends: Speculations on Affective Development, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 192-237.
Graham, S. (1991). A review of attribution theory in achievement contexts. Educat. Psychol.
Rev. 3: 5-39.
Graham, S., and Weiner, B. (1986). From an attributional theory of emotion to developmental
psychology: A round-trip ticket? Soc. Cognit. 4: 152-179.
Gross, D., and Harris, P. L. (1988). False beliefs about emotion: Children's understanding of
misleading emotional displays, lnt. Z Behav. Dev. 11: 475-488.
Gunnar, M. R. (1986). Human developmental psychoneuroendocrinology: A review of
research on neuroendocrine responses to challenge and threat in infancy and childhood.
In Lamb, M., Brown, A., and Rogoff, B. (eds.), Advances in Developmental Psychology
(Vol. 4), Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 51-103.

302

Thompson

Gunnar, M. R., Mangelsdorf, S., Larson, M., and Hertzgaard, L. (1989). Attachment,
temperament and adrenocortical activity in infancy: A study of psychoendoerine
regulation. Dev. Psychol. 25: 355-363.
Gunnar, M. R., Marvinney, D., Isensee, J., and Fisch, R. O. (1989). Coping with uncertainty:
New models of the relations between hormonal, behavioral and cognitive processes. In
Palermo, D. (ed.), Coping with Uncertain(F, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 101-129.
Gunnar, M. R., Mangelsdorf, S., Kestenbaum, R., Lang, S., Larson, M., and Andreas, D.
(1991). Temperament, attachment, and neuroendocrine reactivity: A systemic approach
to the study of stress in normal infants. In Cicchetti, D., (ed.), The Emergence of a
Discipline: Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 119-138.
Harris, P. L. (1983). Children's understanding of the link between situation and emotion. Z
Exp. Child Psychol. 36: 490-509.
Harris, P. L., and Gross, D. (1989). Children's understanding of real and apparent emotion.
In Astington, J. W., Harris, P. L, and Olson, D. R. (eds.), Developing Theories of Mind,
Cambridge University Press, New York, pp. 295-314.
Harris, P. L., and Lipian, M. S. (1989). Understanding emotion and experiencing emotion.
In Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.), Children's Understanding of Emotion, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 241-258.
Harris, P. L., and Olthof, T. (1982). The child's concept of emotion. In Butterworth, G., and
Light, P. (eds.), Social Cognition: Studies in the Development of Understandin~ University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 188-209.
Harris, P. L., Olthof, T., and Meerum Terwogt, M. (1981). Children's knowledge of emotion.
J. Child Psychol. Psychiat. 22: 247-261.
Harris, P. L., Guz, G. R., Lipian, M. S., and Man-Shu, Z. (1985). Insight into the time course
of emotion among Western and Chinese children. Child Dev. 56: 972-988.
Harris, P. L., Donnelly, K., Guz, G. R., and Pitt-Watson, R. (1986). Children's understanding
of the distinction between real and apparent emotion. Child Dev. 57: 895-909.
Harris, P. L., Olthof, T., Meerum Terwogt, M., and Hardman, C. E. (1987). Children's
knowledge of the situations that provoke emotion. Int. Z Behav. Dev. 10: 319-343.
Harter, S. (1982a). A cognitive-developmental approach to children's understanding of affect
and trait labels. In Serafica, F.C. (ed.), Social-Cognitive Development in Context, Guilford,
New York, pp. 27-61.
Harter, S. (1982b). Children's understanding of multiple emotions: A cognitive-developmental
approach. In Overton, W. F. (ed.), The Relationship Between Social and Cognitive
Development, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 147-194.
Hatter, S. (1982c). The perceived competence scale for children. Child Dev. 53: 87-97.
Hatter, S., and Buddin, B. J. (1987). Children's understanding of the simultaneity of two
emotions: A five-stage developmental acquisition sequence. Dev. Psychol. 23: 388-399.
Harter, S., and Pike, R. (1984). The pictorial scale of perceived competence and social
acceptance for young children. Child Dev. 55: 1969-1982.
Haviland, J. M., and Lelwica, M. (1987). The induced affect response: 10-week-old infants'
responses to three emotion expressions. Dev. Psychol. 23: 97-104.
Healey, B. T., Fox, N. A., and Porges, S. W. (1988). The Heritabil#y of Autonomic Patterns
and Social Behavior in Young Twins, Manuscript submitted for publication, University of
Miami Medical School.
Hetherington, E. M., Cox, M., and Cox, R. (1982). Effects of divorce on parents and children.
In Lamb, M. (ed.), Nontraditional Families, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 233-288.
Hoffman, M. L. (1982). Development of prosocial motivation: Empathy and guilt. In
Eisenberg, N. (ed.), The Development of Prosocial Behavior, Academic, New York, pp.
281-313.
Izard, C. E., and Malatesta, C. Z. (1987). Perspectives on emotional development I:
Differential emotions theory of early emotional development. In Osofsky, J. D. (ed.),
Handbook of Infant Development, (2rid Ed), Wiley, New York, pp. 494-554.
Jersild, A. T. (1954). Emotional development. In Carmichael, L. (ed.), Manual of Child
Psychology (2nd Ed.), Wiley, New York, pp. 833-917.

Emotional Regulation and Development

303

Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., and Snidman, N. (1987). The physiology and psychology of behavioral
inhibition in children. Child Dev. 58: 1459-1473.
Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., and Gibbons, J. (1989). Inhibited and uninhibited types of children.
Child Dev. 60: 838-845.
Karraker, K. H., and Lake, M. A. (1991). Normative stress and coping processes in infancy.
In Cummings, E. M., Greene, A. L., and Karraker, K. H. (eds.), Life-Span Developmental
Psychology: Life-Span Perspectives on Stress and Coping, Erlbanm, Hillsdale, New Jersey,
pp. 85-108.
Kessen, W., and Mandler, G. (1961). Anxiety, pain, and the inhibition of distress. PsychoL
Rev. 68: 396-404.
Kinsbourne, M., and Bemporad, B. (1984). Lateralization of emotion: A model and the
evidence. In Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (eds.), The Psychobiology of Affective
Development, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 259-291.
Kinsbourne, M., and Hiscock, M. (1983). The normal and deviant development of functional
lateralization of the brain. In Mussen, P. H. (ed.); Haith, M. M., and Campos, J. J. (Vol.
eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology (Vol. II): Infancy and Developmental Psychobiology
(4th Ed.), Wiley, New York, pp. 157-280.
Klinnert, M. D., Campos, J. J., Sorce, J. F., Emde, R. N., and Svejda, M. (1983). Emotions
as behavior regulators: Social referencing in infancy. In Plutchik, R., and Kellerman, H.
(eds.), Emotion: Theory, Research, and Experience (Vol. 2): Emotions in Early Development,
Academic, New York, pp. 57-86.
Korner, A. F., and Thoman, E. B. (1970). Visual alertness in neonates as evoked by maternal
care. J. Exp. Child PsychoL 10: 67-78.
Korner, A. F., and Thoman, E. B. (1972). The relative efficacy of contact and
vestibular-proprioeeptive stimulation in soothing neonates. Child Dev. 43: 443-453.
Kropp, J. P., and Haynes, O. M. (1987). Abusive and nonabusive mothers, ability to identify
general and specific emotion signals of infants. Child Dev. 58: 187-190.
Labouvie-Vief, G., Hakim-Larson, J., DeVoe, M., and Schoeberlein, S. (1989). Emotions and
self-regulation: A life span view. Human Dev. 32: 279-299.
Lamb, M. E. (1981a). Developing trust and perceived effectance in infancy. In Lipsitt, L.P.
(ed.), Advances in Infancy Research (Vol. 2), Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey, pp. 101-127.
Lamb, M. E. (1981b). The development of social expectations in the first year of life. In
Lamb, M. E., and Sherrod, L. (eds.), Infant Social Cognition, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New
Jersey, pp. 155-175.
Lamb, M. E., and Malkin, C. M. (1986). The development of social expectations in
distress-relief sequences: A longitudinal study. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 9: 235-249.
Lamb, M. E., Thompson, R. A., Gardner, W. P., and Charnov, E. L. (1985). Infant-Mother
Attachment, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Lerner, J. V., and Lerner, R. M. (1983). Temperament and adaptation across life: Theoretical
and empirical issues. In Baltes, P. B., and Brim, O. G., Jr. (eds.), Life-Span Development
and Behavior (Vol. 5), Academic, New York, pp. 197-231.
Lepper, M. R. (1988). Motivational considerations in the study of instruction. Cognit. Instr.
5: 289-309.
Levenson, R. W. (1988). Emotion and the autonomic nervous system: A prospectus for
research on autonomic specificity. In Wagner, H. L. (ed.), Social Psychophysiology and
Emotion: Theory and Clinical Applications, Wiley, London, pp. 17-42.
Lewis, M., and Michalson, L. (1983). Children's Emotions and Moods: Developmental Theory
and Measurement, Plenum, New York.
Lewis, M., and Schaeffer, S. (1981). Peer behavior and mother-infant interaction in maltreated
children. In Lewis, M., and Rosenblum, L. (eds.), The Uncommon Child, Plenum, New
York, pp. 193-223.
Lipsitt, L. (1983). Stress in infancy: Toward understanding the origins of coping behavior. In
Garmezy, N., and Rutter, M. (eds.), Stress, Coping, and Development in Children,
McGraw-Hill, New York, pp. 161-190.
Malatesta, C. Z. (1981). Affective development over the lifespan: Involution or growth?
Merrill-Palmer Q. 27: 145-173.

304

Thompson

Malatesta, C. Z. (1990). The role of emotions in the development and organization of
personality. In Thompson, R. A. (ed.), Socioemotional Development. Nebraska Symposium
on Motivation (Vol. 36), University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, New Jersey, pp. 1-56.
Malatesta, C. Z., and Haviland, J. M. (1982). Learning display rules: The socialization of
emotion expression in infancy. Child Dev. 53: 991-1003.
Malatesta, C. Z., and Izard, C. 13. (1984). The ontogenesis of human social signals: From
biological imperative to symbol utilization. In Fox, N. A., and Davidson, R. J. (eds.), The
Psychobiology of Affective Development, Erlbaum, HiUsdale, New Jersey, pp. 161-206.
Malatesta, C. Z., Grigoryev, P., Lamb, C., Albin, M., and Culver, C. (1986). Emotion
socialization and expressive development in preterm and full-term infants. Child Dev. 57:
316-330.
Malatesta, C. Z., Culver, C., Tesman, J. R., and Shepard, B. (1989). The development of
emotion expression during the first two years of life. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 54
(1-2, Serial no. 219).
Markus, H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information about the self. J. Person. Soc.
Psychol. 35: 63-78.
Masters, J. C., and Carlson, C. R. (1984). Children's and adults' understanding of the causes
and consequences of emotional states. In Izard, C. E., Kagan, J., and Zajonc, R. B. (eds.),
Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 438-463.
Masters, J. C., Ford, M. E., and Arend, R. A. (1983). Children's strategies for controlling
affective responses to aversive social experience. Motiv. Emotion 7: 103-116.
McCoy, C. L., and Masters, J. C. (1985). The development of children's strategies for the
social control of emotion. Child Dev. 56: 1214-1222.
Meerum Terwogt, M., and Olthof, T. (1989). Awareness and self-regulation of emotion in
young children. In Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.), Children's Understanding of
Emotion, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 209-237.
Meerum Terwogt, M., Koops, W., Oosterhoff, T., and Olthof, T. (1986). Development in
processing of multiple emotional situations. J. Gen. PsychoL 113: 109-119.
Meerum Terwogt, M., Schene, J., and Harris, P. L. (1986). Self-control of emotional reactions
by young children. J. Child Psychol. Psychiat. 27: 357-366.
Miller, P. J., and Moore, B. B. (1989). Narrative conjunctions of caregiver and child: A
comparative perspective on socialization through stories. Ethos 17: 428-449.
Miller, P. J., and Sperry, L. L. (1987). The socialization of anger and aggression. Merrill-Palmer
Q. 33: 1-31.
Miller, P. J., and Sperry, L. L. (1988). The socialization and acquisition of emotional meanings,
with special reference to language: A reply to Saarni. Merrill-Palmer Q. 34: 217-222.
Miller, S. M., and Green, M. L. (1985). Coping with stress and frustration: Origins, nature,
and development. In Lewis, M., and Saarni, C. (eds.), The Socialization of Emotions,
Plenum, New York, pp. 263-314.
Mischel, H. N., and Mischel, W. (1983). The development of children's knowledge of
self-control strategies. Child Dev. 54: 603-619.
Mischel, W., and Mischel, H. N. (1977). Self-control and the self. In Mischel, T., (ed.), The
Self: Psychological and Philosophical Issues, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 31-64.
Miyake, K., Chen, S.-J., and Campos, J. J. (1985). Infant temperament, mother's mode of
interaction, and attachment in Japan: An interim report. In Bretherton, I., and Waters,
E. (eds.), Growing points in attachment theory and research. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child
Dev. 50 (1-2, Serial no. 209).
Miyake, K., Campos, J. J., Kagan, J., and Bradshaw, D. L. (1986). Issues in socioemotional
development. In Stevenson, H., Azuma, H., and Hakuta, K. (eds.), Child Development
and Education in Japan, Freeman, New York, pp. 239-281.
Mood, D. W., Johnson, J. E., and Shantz, C. U. (1978). Social comprehension and
affect-matching in young children. Merrill-Palmer Q. 24: 63-66.
Panksepp, J. (1989). The neurobiology of emotions: Of animal brains and human feelings. In
Wagner, H., and Manstead, T. (eds.), Handbook of Psychophysiology, Plenum, New York,
pp. 5-26.

Emotional Regulation and Development

305

Porges, S. W. (1991). Vagal tone: An autonomic mediator of affect. In Garber, J., and Dodge,
K. (eds.), The Development of Emotion Regulation and Dysregulation, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 111-128.
Ridgeway, D., Waters, E., and Kuczaj, S. A. (1985). Acquisition of emotion-descriptive
language: Receptive and productive vocabulary norms for ages 18 months to 6 years.
Dev. Psychol. 21: 901-908.
Rothbart, M. K. (1981). Measurement of temperament in infancy. Child Dev. 52: 569-578.
Rothbart, M. K., and Derryberry, D. (1981). Development of individual differences in
temperament. In Lamb, M. E., and Brown, A. L. (eds.), Advances in Developmental
Psychology (Vol. 1), Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 37-86.
Rothbart, M. K., and Posner, M. I. (1981). Temperament and the development of
self-regulation. In Hartlage, L. C., and Telzrow, C. F. (eds.), The Neuropsychology of
Individual Differences: A Developmental Perspective, Plenum, New York, pp. 93-123.
Rubin, K. H., and Rose-Krasnor, L. (1986). Social-cognitive and social behavioral perspectives
on problem solving. In Perlmutter, M. (ed.), Cognitive Perspectives on Children's Social
and Behavioral Development. Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology (Vol. 18),
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 1-68.
Rubin, K. H., and Rose-Krasnor, L. (in press). Interpersonal problem-solving and social
competence in children. In van Hasselt, V. B., and Hersen, M. (eds.), Handbook of Social
Development: ,4 Lifespan Perspective, Plenum, New York.
Russell, J. A., and Ridgeway, D. (1983). Dimensions underlying children's emotion concepts.
Dev. PsychoL 19: 795-804.
Rutter, M., and Garmezy, N. (1983). Developmental psychopathology. In Mussen, P. H. (ed.),
Hetherington, E. M. (Vol. ed.), Handbook of Child Psychology (Vol. IV): Socialization,
Personality, and Social Development, Wiley, New York, pp. 775-911.
Saarni, C. (1979). Children's understanding of display rules for expressive behavior. Dev.
PsychoL 15: 424-429.
Saarni, C. (1984). An observational study of children's attempts to monitor their expressive
behavior. Child Dev. 55: 1504-1513.
Saarni, C. (1989). Children's understanding of strategic control of emotional expression in
social transactions. In Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.), Children's Understanding of
Emotion, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 181-208.
Saarni, C. (1990). Emotional competence: How emotions and relationships become integrated.
In Thompson, R. A. (ed.), Socioemotional Development. Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation (Vol. 36), University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, New Jersey, pp. 115-182.
Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.) (1989). Children's understanding of emotion. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Sagi, A., Lamb, M. E., Lewkowicz, K. S., Shoham, R., Dvir, R., and Estes, D. (1985). Security
of infant-mother, -father, and -metapelet attachments among Kibbutz-reared Israeli
children. In Bretherton, I., and Waters, E. (eds.), Growing Points in Attachment Theory
and Research. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 50 (I-2, Serial no. 209).
Schwartz, R. M., and Trabasso, T. (1984). Children's understanding of emotions. In Izard, C.
E., Kagan, J., and Zajone, R. (eds.), Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior, Cambridge
University Press, New York, pp. 409-437.
Selman, R. L. (1981). The Growth of Interpersonal Understanding, Academic, New York.
Selman, R. L. (1981). What children understand of intrapsychic processes: The child as a
budding personality theorist. In Shapiro, E. K., and Weber, E. (eds.), Cognitive and
Affective Growth, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, pp. 187-215.
Shantz, C. U. (1983). Social Cognition. In Mussen, P. H. (ed.), Flavell, J. H., and Markman,
E. M. (Vol. eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology (Vol. III): Cognitive Development, Wiley,
New York, pp. 495-555.
Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., and O'Connor, C. (lV87). Emotion knowledge: Further
exploration of a prototype approach. J. Person. Soc. Psychol. 52: 1061-1086.
Smolek, L., and Weinraub, M. (March 1979). Separation Distress and Representational
Development. Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in
Child Development, San Francisco, California.

306

Thompson

Sroufe, L. A., and Wunsch, J. P. (1972). The development of laughter in the first year of life.
Child Dev. 43: 1326-1344.
Stein, N. L., and Levine, L. J. (1989). The causal organization of emotional knowledge: A
developmental study. Cognit. Emotion. 3: 343-378.
Stein, N. L., and Trabasso, T. (1989). Children's understanding of changing emotional states.
In Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.), Children's Understanding of Emotion, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 50-77.
Stern, D. N. (1974). The goal and structure of mother-infant play. Z Am. Acad. Child Psychiat.
13: 402-421.
Stern, D. N. (1977). The First Relationship, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Stern, D. N. (1986). The Interpersonal World of the Infant, Basic, New York.
Stern, D. N., Hofer, L., Haft, W., and Dore, J. (1985). Affect attunement: The sharing of
feeling states between mother and infant by means of intermodal fluency. In Field, T.
M., and Fox, N. A. (eds.), Social Perception in Infants, Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey, pp.
249-268.
Stiefel, G. S., Plunkett, J. W., and Meisels, S. J. (1987). Affective expression among preterm
infants of varying levels of biological risk. Infant Behav. Dev. 10: 151-164.
Stifter, C. A., and Fox, N. A. (1990). Infant reactivity: Physiological correlates of newborn
and 5-month temperament. Dev. Psychol. 26: 582-588.
Stipek, D. (1983). A developmental analysis of pride and shame. Human Dev. 26: 42-54.
Taylor, D. A., and Harris, P. L. (1984). Knowledge of strategies for the expression of emotion
among normal and maladjusted boys: A research note. Z Child Psychol. Psychiat. 24:
141-145.
Termine, N. T., and Izard, C. E. (1988). Infants' responses to their mothers' expressions of
joy and sadness. Dev. Psychol. 24: 223-229.
Thompson, R. A. (1987). Development of children's inferences of the emotions of others.
Dev. Psychol. 23: 124-131.
Thompson, R. A. (1989). Causal attributions and children's emotional understanding. In
Saarni, C., and Harris, P. L. (eds.), Children's Understanding of Emotion, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 117-150.
Thompson, R. A. (1990). Emotion and self-regulation. In Thompson, R. A. (ed.),
Socioemotional Development. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 36), University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, pp. 367-467.
Thompson, R. A., and Lamb, M. E. (1983). Individual differences in dimensions of
socioemotional development in infancy. In Plutchik, R., and Kellerman, H. (eds.),
Emotion: Theory, Research, and Experience (Vol. 2): Emotions in Early Development,
Academic, New York, pp. 87-114.
Thompson, R. A., and Limber, S. (1990). "Social anxiety" in infancy: Stranger wariness and
separation distress. In Leitenberg, H. (ed.), SocialAnx&ty, Plenum, New York, pp. 85-137.
Thompson, R. A., Cicchetti, D., Lamb, M. E., and Malkin, C. (1985). Emotional responses
of Down Syndrome and normal infants in the Strange Situation: The organization of
affective behavior in infants. Dev. PsychoL 21: 828-841.
Thompson, R. A., Connell, J. P., and Bridges, L. (1988). Temperament, emotion, and social
interactive behavior in the Strange Situation: A component process analysis of attachment
system functioning. Child Dev., 59: 1102-1110.
Trabasso, T., Stein, N. L., and Johnson, L. R. (1981). Children's knowledge of events: A
causal analysis of story structure. In Bower, G. (ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, Academic, New York, pp. 237-282.
Tronick, E. Z., Cohn, J., and Shea, E. (1986). The transfer of affect between mothers and
infants. In Brazelton, T. B., and Yogman, M. W. (eds.), Affective Development in lnfancy,
Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey, pp. 11-25.
Tucker, D. M., and Frederick, S. L. (1989). Emotion and brain lateralization. In Wagner, H.,
and Manstead, T. (eds.), Handbook of Psychophysiology: Emotion and Social Behavior,
Wiley, New York, pp. 22-70.
Watson, J. S. (1972). Smiling, cooing, and "the game." Merrill-Palmer Q. 18: 323-339.

Emotional Regulation and Development

307

Watson, J. S., and Ramey, C. T. (1972). Reactions to response-contingent stimulation in early
infancy. Merrill-Palmer Q. 18: 219-227.
Weiner, B., and Graham, S. (1984). An attributional approach to emotional development. In
Izard, C. E., Kagan, J., and Zajone, R. (eds.), Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior,
Cambridge University Press, New York, pp. 167-191.
Zahn-Waxler, C., and Kochanska, G. (1990). The origins of guilt. In Thompson, R. A. (ed.),
Socioemotional Development. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 36), University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska, pp. 183-268.

